STANDARDS OF PRACTICE

Society of Interventional Radiology
IR Pre-Procedure Patient Safety
Checklist by the Safety and
Health Committee
Poyan Raﬁei, MD, Eric M. Walser, MD, James R. Duncan, MD, PhD, Hunaid Rana, BS,
Jason Robert Ross, MD, Robert K. Kerlan, Jr, MD, Kathleen A. Gross, MSN, BS, RN-BC, CRN,
Stephen Balter, PhD, Gabriel Bartal, MD, Nadine Abi-Jaoudeh, MD, CCRP, Michael S. Stecker, MD,
Alan M. Cohen, MD, Robert G. Dixon, MD, Raymond H. Thornton, MD, and Boris Nikolic, MD,
MBA, for the Society of Interventional Radiology Health and Safety Committee
PREAMBLE
The National Patient Safety Goals program was established by The Joint
Commission in 2002 to help accredited organizations address areas of
concern regarding patient safety in the United States. The Universal
Protocol, adopted by The Joint Commission in 2003, is included in the
National Patient Safety Goals to prevent wrong person, wrong procedure,
and wrong site surgery in all surgical and nonsurgical invasive procedures
(1). These guidelines have been applied speciﬁcally to the practice of
interventional radiology (IR) (2); however, a pre–procedure checklist
tailored to IR may further improve patient safety and outcomes.
Recent interest has evolved in developing a surgical or time-out
checklist to reduce morbidity and mortality caused by human errors.
For example, Haynes et al (3) demonstrated that implementation of a
19-item surgical checklist adopted from the World Health Organization
(4) reduced the rate of death associated with surgery from 1.5% to 0.8%
in a global population. Inpatient complications also were reduced from
a baseline of 11% to 7%. Corso et al (5) showed that use of a 20-item
time-out checklist derived from the Cardiovascular and Interventional
Radiological Society of Europe (6) eliminated adverse events associated
with IR procedures in the ﬁrst year of use. Such positive results with the
use of checklists have also been conﬁrmed in other studies (7–9).
From the Department of Radiology (P.R., E.M.W., J.R.R.), University of Texas
Medical Branch (H.R.), 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-0709;
Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology (J.R.D.), St. Louis, Missouri; Department of
Radiology (R.K.K.), University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
California; Private Practice (K.A.G.), Owings Mills, Maryland; Departments of
Medicine and Radiology (S.B.), Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, New York; Department of Radiology (G.B.), Meir Medical Center, Kfar
Saba, Israel; University of California, Irvine (N.A.-J.), Orange, California;
Division of Angiography and Interventional Radiology (M.S.S.), Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Vascular/Interventional Radiology (A.M.C.), University of Texas, Houston, Texas; Department of Radiology (R.G.D.), University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina; Department of Radiology (R.H.T.), Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York; and Department of Radiology (B.N.), Stratton
Medical Center, Albany, New York. Received and accepted March 1, 2016.
Address correspondence to P.R.; E-mail: poraﬁei@utmb.edu
N.A.-J. received grants from Teclison Cheery Pharma (Short Hills, New
Jersey), SillaJen, Inc (San Diego, California), Philips Healthcare (Best, The
Netherlands), and W.L. Gore & Associates (Flagstaff, Arizona). None of the
other authors have identiﬁed a conﬂict of interest.
Published by Elsevier, Inc., on behalf of SIR.
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2016; XX:]]]–]]]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jvir.2016.03.002

However, other studies have failed to duplicate signiﬁcant
improvements in patient safety following widespread implementation
of pre-procedure checklists (10,11). These failures could reﬂect issues
with checklist design or its implementation. A well-designed checklist
should include items that effectively address the underlying failure
modes for the adverse events that occur in any particular operational
environment. In addition, the checklist should be designed to facilitate
reliable execution of the control strategy for those failure modes.
Creating a checklist that addresses the cause of every conceivable
adverse event would result in a checklist so long as to be impractical.
Rather, patient safety is better served by allowing local teams to build a
checklist from a list of items that matches the operational requirements
of their working environment and case mix. A series of potential
checklist items is provided along with their rationale.

PRE-PROCEDURE CHECKLIST
The pre-procedure checklist is a list of pertinent items to review before
the start of a procedure and can include the components of the
Universal Protocol to remain compliant with The Joint Commission
standards. Such a list may disclose patient allergies, use of contrast
agent, prophylactic antibiotics, sedation plan, laboratory values, need
for blood products, review of prior imaging, specimen collection,
radiation or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging safety precautions,
need for special medications or equipment, additional safety concerns,
and nonstandard items for review (“sidebar”). An example of a preprocedure checklist is shown in the Table.

UNIVERSAL PROTOCOL
The Joint Commission Universal Protocol is a requirement for hospital
accreditation in the United States and includes pre-procedure veriﬁcation, site marking, and time-out. The pre-procedure veriﬁcation process
veriﬁes the correct patient, correct procedure, and correct site and is an
ongoing process of gathering information before the procedure. Site
marking is performed when there is more than one possible location for
a procedure, such as different limbs, organs, or level of the spine, and
when performing the procedure in a different location would negatively
affect quality or safety (1). The time-out is performed immediately
before the start of the procedure and involves the patient (whenever
practical) and immediate members of the procedure team, including
physicians, radiology technologists, and nurses. The time-out should be
initiated by a designated member of the team and be standardized.
During the time-out, the team members agree at a minimum on correct
patient identity, correct procedure, and correct site.

2

’

SIR Pre-Procedure Patient Safety Checklist

Raﬁei et al

JVIR

the start of the procedure can help avoid minor or major reactions with
potential morbidity.

Table . Pre-Procedure Checklist
Pre-Procedure Checklist

’

Patient Label

Patient identiﬁers (at least 2)
Patient name
Patient date of birth
Patient medical record number
Procedure(s)
Site mark
Allergies
Contrast agent
Antibiotics
Administration time
Sedation plan
Minimal sedation
Moderate sedation
Deep sedation
General anesthesia
Laboratory tests
INR
Platelets
PTT
Creatinine
Last dose of anticoagulation
Blood products
Type and screen
Prior imaging
Specimen collection
Radiation safety
Staff protective and monitoring equipment

CONTRAST AGENT
Use of radiocontrast media in IR has many beneﬁts in localizing
pathology, guiding treatment, and conﬁrming treatment response.
However, a major morbidity associated with intravascular radiographic contrast use is contrast-induced nephropathy, which is reported
as the third most common cause of acute tubular necrosis in patients
admitted to the hospital (15). Very few published studies have a
suitable control group to permit the separation of contrast-induced
nephropathy from post-contrast acute kidney injury, which may occur
regardless of whether contrast medium is the cause of renal deterioration (16). Although more recent literature questions whether
contrast-induced nephropathy exists (17,18), we treat it as a real but
rare entity and recommend exercising caution when using intravascular
radiographic contrast media in patients with preexisting renal disease.
For intravascular angiography, physicians may elect to use a hypoosmolar agent, such as iopamidol (Isovue; Bracco Diagnostic Inc, Monroe
Township, New Jersey), or an iso-osmolar agent, such as iodixanol
(Visipaque; GE Healthcare, Princeton, New Jersey), owing to the less
harmful effects on renal function compared with hyperosmolar agents
(19,20). A less costly option with a hyperosmolar agent, such as iohexol
(Omnipaque; GE Healthcare), may be favorable for nonvascular cases.

ANTIBIOTICS
Antibiotic prophylaxis for an IR procedure is commonly administered
to prevent infection in vascular and nonvascular cases. Although there
are no published multicenter randomized trials evaluating antibiotic
prophylaxis during IR procedures, recommendations have been set
forth by the Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) regarding the
use of prophylactic antibiotics in IR (21). The choice of antimicrobial
agent depends on the type of procedure as well as the patient’s renal
and hepatic function and allergies.

Optimize low dose radiation
Patient protection
MR imaging safety
MR-compatible equipment and instruments
Patient and staff screening
Need for special equipment
Disposable items
Nondisposable equipment
Procedural-related medications
Additional safety concerns
Sidebar
Consent conﬁrmation
Patient radiation history
Pregnancy test result
Procedure sterility classiﬁcation
Prophylactic allergy premedication conﬁrmation
INR ¼ international normalized ratio; PTT ¼ partial thromboplastin time.

SEDATION PLAN
An accurate sedation plan reduces patient movement, pain perception, and
anxiety, allowing for a safe, comfortable, and successful procedure (22).
There is high variability in the complexity and magnitude of injury
incurred with various IR procedures, and the sedation plan can be
inﬂuenced by many patient variables, including, but not limited to,
patient age, patient positioning during the procedure, body mass index,
Mallampati score, American Society of Anesthesiologists physical
classiﬁcation score, surgical or medical comorbidities, allergies, current
medications, psychosocial history, and oral intake restrictions according to
institutional guidelines. A medical assessment before a procedure is
therefore critical in deciding on a sedation plan for a particular patient.
Practice parameters for sedation and analgesia in radiologic care have been
further described by the American College of Radiology and SIR (23).
The American Society of Anesthesiologists recognizes four levels
of sedation: minimal sedation (anxiolysis), moderate sedation/analgesia
(conscious sedation), deep sedation/analgesia, and general anesthesia
(24). The beneﬁts of the type of sedation must be weighed against the
risks and discussed with the patient. The sedation plan should also be
reviewed with the IR team before the start of the procedure.

PATIENT ALLERGIES

LABORATORY TESTS/BLOOD PRODUCTS

Various agents are used during IR procedures; local anesthetics,
opioids, anxiolytics, contrast agents, and prophylactic antibiotics are
frequently administered. Use of latex gloves is also common if the
institution is not a latex-free environment. The most common agents
responsible for anaphylactic reactions during surgical and medical
procedures are muscle relaxants and latex, followed by antibiotics and
induction agents (12). The major emphasis on managing a patient’s
allergies is prevention (13,14), and reviewing a patient’s allergies before

Routine hematologic evaluation of patients is common for many IR
procedures to reduce the risk of bleeding, sedation, and infectious
complications. Recommendations for the use of blood products and
other hemostatic agents in IR have been described by Patel et al (25).
A patient’s biochemical proﬁle may be useful before the administration
of intravascular contrast media in select patients. Liver function tests
are also routinely evaluated before hepatic embolization treatments
and transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt procedures.

Volume XX

’

Number X

’

Month

’

2016

PRIOR IMAGING
Review of prior medical imaging studies can be very helpful in guiding
a particular procedure, such as in localization of an infected ﬂuid
collection for percutaneous drainage or in identiﬁcation of a migrated
intravascular foreign body for endovascular retrieval. This review may
decrease procedural time, reduce use of contrast agent, and prevent
complications. Some ﬂuoroscopy units may also allow for display of
the patient’s prior imaging study on the in-room monitors for
continuous review during a procedure.

SPECIMEN COLLECTION
Collecting specimens for diagnostic purposes may sometimes require
special media for storage (or transportation) or need speciﬁc personnel
for determining a preliminary diagnosis or adequate tissue sampling.
Awareness of the IR team before the procedure allows for appropriate
collection of storage media and/or adequate notiﬁcation of the
pathologist or cytotechnologist. This in turn helps reduce procedural
time delays and ensures optimal timing of tissue sampling.

3

procedures speciﬁc to MR imaging–guided interventional procedures
need to be implemented to ensure safe operation, including appropriate
screening of patients and all staff personnel before entering Zone 3 (35).
The “ACR Guidance Document on MR Safe Practices: 2013” is an
excellent resource that provides recommendations on procedures,
personnel qualiﬁcations and training, and site access restrictions (36).

NEED FOR SPECIAL EQUIPMENT
Use of ﬂuoroscopy, ultrasound, and computed tomography is routine
in IR; however, special equipment for certain procedures is sometimes
necessary. This may include disposable items, such as speciﬁc vascular
stents, thrombectomy catheters, or detachable coils, or nondisposable
items, such as intravascular ultrasound, rheolytic devices, percutaneous
ablation equipment, or endoscopic instruments for cholangioscopy.
Procedural-related medications (eg, heparin, alteplase) may also be
required. Adequate planning for these items can properly ensure
appropriate equipment is available before the start of the case.

ADDITIONAL SAFETY CONCERNS
RADIATION SAFETY
IR procedures with ﬂuoroscopy and computed tomography guidance
expose patients and health care workers to ionizing radiation that can
be harmful in large or cumulative doses (26,27). A collaborative
approach to radiation safety is recommended to achieve the lowest
dose to all involved. Staff should have appropriate personal protective
equipment, including ﬁtted lead aprons, thyroid shields, and leaded eye
wear. Static and mobile shielding devices may also be incorporated into
IR suites to decrease radiation exposure (28).
The “Image Wisely” campaign for adults has been developed to raise
awareness of opportunities to eliminate unnecessary imaging examinations
and to lower the amount of radiation used in medical imaging (29). The
campaign website contains various educational materials for different
radiation protection issues, including technical principles for IR
procedures. For dose reduction strategies in pediatric patients, the “Image
Gently, Step Lightly” campaign website includes a procedural checklist to
maximize radiation safety during interventional procedures (30). A few of
the main points of the checklist include stepping lightly on the ﬂuoroscopy
pedal, the use of low-dose pulsed ﬂuoroscopy, tight collimation to exclude
radiosensitive organs, and the use of last image hold and electronic zoom.
The use of patient shielding is not recommended on a regular basis;
however, shielding is commonly used for pediatric patients and for
potentially pregnant patients. This may include extragonadal shields and/
or fetal monitoring for patients known to be pregnant.
Appropriate monitoring and analysis of prior radiation dose is
necessary for long-term regulation of radiation exposure. For staff
members, the International Commission on Radiological Protection
recommends two dosimeters—one at the collar level and one under the
apron—for an accurate assessment of radiation dosage (31). For
patients, prompt review and recording of dose is imperative (30).
Using these tools, statistical analyses with established systems for
feedback are a proven method for long-term reduction of ionizing
radiation dose (32).

MR IMAGING SAFETY
MR imaging has become a promising tool in guiding both diagnostic
and therapeutic procedures. An important advantage of MR imaging is
the lack of ionizing radiation. MR imaging also provides enhanced soft
tissue contrast; is able to measure and quantify ﬂow, diffusion, and
perfusion; and allows for evaluation of temperature changes (33,34).
However, all operating equipment used within the MR imaging
ﬁeld must be nonmagnetic, and all instruments should be MR
compatible. Electrical conductive materials (eg, wires associated with
electrocardiogram monitoring or radiofrequency grounding pads)
should be kept from touching the patient’s skin. Internal policies and

This element of the checklist is used to address any speciﬁc safety
concern related to the patient. There are cultural and professional
hierarchies that may lead to nonphysician providers on the medical
team feeling apprehensive or embarrassed about speaking up when the
physician naturally takes the leadership role. Allotting time for anyone
on the IR team to speak about a safety concern by simply asking,
“Does anyone have any other concerns?” may help avoid communication errors and improve safety attitudes and teamwork.

SIDEBAR
This is a catch-all category where nonstandard items are reviewed. This
may include patient positioning, changes to the IR consultation,
consent conﬁrmation, the patient’s radiation history, pregnancy test
result, procedural sterility classiﬁcation, or prophylactic allergy premedication conﬁrmation. Depending on the procedure and institution,
additional items of concern can be discussed here.

DISCUSSION
When reliably implemented, checklists lead to improved patient outcomes (37–39). Checklists are a tool that reduces reliance on memory,
improves team communication, and increases situational awareness
among team members (40). However, similar to any new tool, using
checklists to improve patient care requires careful design and effective
implementation. The description of potential checklist items presented
here is intended to help teams construct checklists that meet the needs
of their patients. Implementing a checklist requires teamwork and
change management.
For most teams, The Joint Commission Universal Protocol is a
required component of the pre-procedure time-out. Other items are
meant to reduce complications related to IR procedures. The checklist
is designed to be reviewed with the physician, nurse, and technologist
when the patient is in the IR room before the start of the procedure.
In an era of fully electronic medical records, we encourage the use
of electronic checklists for several reasons. First, default patient
information can be loaded before the start of the case to help
streamline operations. Second, data can be linked and tracked for
future reference, such as a patient’s prior radiation exposure. Third,
electronic checklists may help reduce paper checklist errors, as
demonstrated in the aviation industry (41).
Checklists should also be designed to promote compliance. The
items listed in the checklist should be individualized to the needs of the
institution and should be kept simple (r 10 items). The checklist
should be allowed to evolve over time with the addition or removal of
items needed to address speciﬁc issues for a particular institution. A

4

’

SIR Pre-Procedure Patient Safety Checklist

checklist that is too complex, time-consuming, or redundant will likely
not be followed well (42). Monitoring, analysis, and feedback may also
improve compliance of appropriately using the checklist (43,44).
Gottumukkala et al (43) demonstrated that the use of an audiovisual
recording system and continual feedback led to substantial improvements in time-out performance over a 3–year period in the pediatric
IR suite.

CONCLUSIONS
The pre-procedure checklist is not a panacea but is designed to
promote communication and enhance teamwork in an effort to
improve patient safety. As stated in the Boeing quick reference
handbook, “checklists cannot be created for all conceivable situations
and are not intended to replace good judgement” (41). We understand
that trial and feedback of such a checklist are necessary for validation
and hope that future studies will assess the usefulness of the checklist in
regard to patient outcomes.

REFERENCES
1. The Joint Commission. 2015 national patient safety goals. Available at:
http://www.jointcommission.org/assets/1/6/2015_NPSG_HAP.pdf.
Accessed March 23, 2016.
2. Angle JF, Nemcek AA, Cohen AM, et al; SIR Standards Division; Joint
Commission Universal Protocol for Preventing Wrong Site, Wrong
Procedure, Wrong Person Surgery. Quality improvement guidelines for
preventing wrong site, wrong procedure, and wrong person errors:
application of the Joint Commission “Universal protocol for preventing
wrong site, wrong procedure, wrong person surgery” to the practice of
interventional radiology. J Vasc interv Radiol 2008; 19:1145–1151.
3. Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A surgical safety checklist to
reduce morbidity and mortality in a global population. N Engl J Med 2009;
360:491–499.
4. World Health Organization. WHO guidelines for safe surgery 2009.
Available at: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241598552_
eng.pdf. Accessed March 23, 2016.
5. Corso R, Vacirca F, Patelli C, Leni D. Use of “Time-Out” checklist in
interventional radiology procedures as a tool to enhance patient safety.
Radiol Med 2014; 119:828–834.
6. Lee MJ, Fanelli F, Haage P, Hausegger K, Van Lienden KP. Patient
safety in interventional radiology: a CIRSE IR checklist. Cardiovasc
Intervent Radiol 2012; 35:244–246.
7. de Vries EN, Prins H, Crolla R, et al; SURPASS Collaborative Group.
Effect of a comprehensive surgical safety system on patient outcomes. N
Engl J Med 2010; 363:1928–1937.
8. Neily J, Mills PD, Young-Xu Y, et al. Association between implantation
of a medical team training program and surgical mortality. JAMA 2010;
304:1693–1700.
9. Koetser IC, de Vries EN, van Delden OM, Smorenburg SM, Boermeester
MA, van Lienden KP. A checklist to improve patient safety in interventional radiology. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2013; 36:312–319.
10. Urbach DR, Govindarajan A, Saskin R, Wilton AS, Baxter NN. Introduction of surgical safety checklists in Ontario, Canada. N Engl J Med 2014;
370:1029–1038.
11. Sewell M, Adebibe M, Jayakumar P, et al. Use of the WHO surgical
safety checklist in trauma and orthopaedic patients. Int Orthop 2011; 35:
897–901.
12. Lieberman P. Anaphylactic reactions during surgical and medical procedures. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002; 110:S64–S69.
13. Caffarelli C, Stringari G, Miraglia DGM, et al. Prevention of allergic
reactions in anesthetized patients. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2011;
24:S91–S99.
14. Dippenaar JM, Naidoo S. Allergic reactions and anaphylaxis during
anaesthesia. Curr Allergy Clin Immunol 2015; 28:18–22.
15. Nash K, Hafeez A, Hou S. Hospital-acquired renal insufﬁciency. Am J
Kidney Dis 2002; 39:930–936.
16. ACR Committee on Drugs and Contrast Media. ACR manual on contrast
media, version 10.1.2015. Available at: http://www.acr.org/  /media/
37D84428BF1D4E1B9A3A2918DA9E27A3.pdf. Accessed March 23,
2016.

Raﬁei et al

’

JVIR

17. McDonald RJ, McDonald JS, Bida JP, et al. Intravenous contrast
material-induced nephropathy: causal or coincident phenomenon? Radiology 2013; 267:106–118.
18. McDonald RJ, McDonald JS, Carter RE, et al. Intravenous contrast
material exposure is not an independent risk factor for dialysis or
mortality. Radiology 2014; 273:714–725.
19. Barrett BJ, Carlisle EJ. Metaanalysis of the relative nephrotoxicity of highand low-osmolality iodinated contrast media. Radiology 1993; 188:171–178.
20. Nguyen SA, Suranyi P, Ravenel JG, et al. Iso-osmolality versus lowosmolality iodinated contrast medium at intravenous contrast-enhanced
CT: effect on kidney function. Radiology 2008; 248:97–105.
21. Venkatesan AM, Kundu S, Sacks D, et al; Society of Interventional
Radiology Standards of Practice Committee. Practice guideline for adult
antibiotic prophylaxis during vascular and interventional radiology procedures. Written by the Standards of Practice Committee for the Society of
Interventional Radiology and Endorsed by the Cardiovascular Interventional Radiological Society of Europe and Canadian Interventional Radiology Association [corrected]. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2010; 21:1611–1630.
22. Johnson S. Sedation and analgesia in the performance of interventional
procedures. Semin Intervent Radiol 2010; 27:368–373.
23. ACR-SIR practice parameter for sedation/analgesia, resolution 23.2015.
Available at: http://www.acr.org/  /media/ACR/Documents/PGTS/guide
lines/Adult_Sedation.pdf. Accessed March 23, 2016.
24. American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Sedation and Analgesia
by Non-Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for sedation and analgesia by
non-anesthesiologists. Anesthesiology 2002; 96:1004–1017.
25. Patel IJ, Davidson JC, Nikolic B, et al; Standards of Practice Committee,
with Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiological Society of Europe
(CIRSE) Endorsement. Consensus guidelines for periprocedural management of coagulation status and hemostasis risk in percutaneous imageguided interventions. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2012; 23:727–736.
26. Balter S, Hopewell JW, Miller DL, Wagner LK, Zelefsky MJ. Fluoroscopically guided interventional procedures: a review of radiation effects
on patients’ skin and hair. Radiology 2010; 254:326–341.
27. National Research Council Committee to Assess Health Risks From
Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation. Health Risks from
Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation: BEIR VII Phase 2.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2006.
28. Miller DL, Vañó E, Bartal G, et al; Cardiovscular and Interventional
Radiology Society of Europe; Society of Interventional Radiology.
Occupational radiation protection in interventional radiology: a joint
guideline of the Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiology Society
of Europe and the Society of Interventional Radiology. Cardiovasc
Intervent Radiol 2010; 33:230–239.
29. Brink JA, Amis ES Jr. Image wisely: a campaign to increase awareness
about adult radiation protection. Radiology 2010; 257:601–602.
30. Sidhu M, Goske MJ, Connolly B, et al. Image gently, step lightly:
promoting radiation safety in pediatric interventional radiology. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 2010; 195:W299–W301.
31. International Commission on Radiological Protection. The 2007 recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection.
ICRP publication 103. Ann ICRP 2007; 37:1–332.
32. Duncan J, Street M, Strother M, Picus D. Optimizing radiation use
during ﬂuoroscopic procedures: a quality and safety improvement
project. J Am Coll Radiol 2013; 10:847–853.
33. Sequeiros RB, Ojala R, Kariniemi J, et al. MR-guided interventional
procedures: a review. Acta Radiol 2005; 46:576–586.
34. Quesson B, deAwart JA, Moonen CT. Magnetic resonance temperature imaging for guidance of thermotherapy. J Magn Reson Imaging
2000; 12:525–533.
35. Hushek SG, Russell L, Moser RF, Hoerter NM, Moriarty TM,
Shields CB. Safety protocols for interventional MRI. Acad Radiol
2005; 12:1143–1148.
36. Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, Bell C, et al. ACR guidance document on MR
safe practices: 2013. J Magn Reson Imaging 2013; 37:501–530.
37. Patel J, Ahmed K, Guru KA, et al. An overview of the use and
implementation of checklists in surgical specialties—a systematic
review. Int J Surg 2014; 12:1317–1323.
38. de Vries EN, Prins HA, Bennink CM, et al. Nature and timing of
incidents intercepted by the SURPASS checklist in surgical patients.
BMJ Qual Saf 2012; 21:503–508.
39. Treadwell JR, Lucas S, Tsou AY. Surgical checklists: a systematic review of impacts and implementation. BMJ Qual Saf 2014; 23:
299–318.

Volume XX

’

Number X

’

Month

’

2016

40. Walker IA, Reshamwalla S, Wilson IH. Surgical safety checklists: do
they improve outcomes? Br J Anaesth 2012; 109:47–54.
41. Boorman D. Today’s electronic checklists reduce likelihood of crew
errors and help prevent mishaps. ICAO J 2001; 1:17–21.
42. Anthes E. Hospital checklists are meant to save lives—so why do they
often fail? Nature 2015; 523:516–518.

5

43. Gottumukkala R, Street M, Fitzpatrick M, Tatineny P, Duncan JR. Improving
team performance during the preprocedure time-out in pediatric interventional
radiology. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2012; 38:387–394.
44. Putnam LR, Levy SM, Sajid M, et al. Multifaceted interventions improve adherence to the surgical checklist. Surgery 2014; 156:
336–344.

SIR DISCLAIMER
The clinical practice guidelines of the Society of Interventional Radiology attempt to deﬁne practice principles that generally should assist in
producing high-quality medical care. These guidelines are voluntary and are not rules. A physician may deviate from these guidelines, as
necessitated by the individual patient and available resources. These practice guidelines should not be deemed inclusive of all proper methods of
care or exclusive of other methods of care that are reasonably directed toward the same result. Other sources of information may be used in
conjunction with these principles to produce a process leading to high-quality medical care. The ultimate judgment regarding the conduct of any
speciﬁc procedure or course of management must be made by the physician, who should consider all circumstances relevant to the individual
clinical situation. Adherence to the SIR Quality Improvement Program will not assure a successful outcome in every situation. It is prudent to
document the rationale for any deviation from the suggested practice guidelines in the department policies and procedure manual or in the
patient’s medical record.

