Research in Social and
Administrative Pharmacy j (2013) j–j

Research Briefs

Can pharmacy assistants play a greater role in public
health programs in community pharmacies? Lessons
from a chlamydia screening study in Canberra,
Australia
Louise S. Deeks, B.Sc. (Hons.), M.R.Pharm.S. (I.Presc.),
P.G.Dip.Pharm.Prac.a,b,*, Gabrielle M. Cooper, B.Pharm., M.P.S.,
D.H.P., Ph.D.a, Marian J. Currie, R.N., R.M., B.App.Sci., G.D.P.H.,
Ph.D.b, Sarah J. Martin, B.Med. (Hons.), D.C.H., F.A.Ch.S.H.M.b,c,
Rhian M. Parker, B.Sc. (Econ.) Hons., M.Sc., M.P.E.T., Ph.D.d,
Rendry Del Rosario, R.N., G.D.Man., Cert.S.R.H.c,
Jane S. Hocking, B.App.Sci., Grad.Cert.Health.Stats, M.P.H., Master
Health Sciences, Ph.D.e, Francis J. Bowden, M.B.B.S., M.D., F.R.A.C.P.,
F.A.C.S.H.P., Grad.Dip.Epi.b,c
a
Discipline of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, Bruce, ACT 2601, Australia
Academic Unit of Internal Medicine, The Australian National University Medical School, Building 4, Level 2, Canberra
Hospital, P.O. Box 11, Woden, ACT 2606, Australia
c
Canberra Sexual Health Centre, Canberra Hospital, P.O. Box 11, Woden, ACT 2606, Australia
d
Centre for Research and Action in Public Health, Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, Bruce, ACT 2601 Australia
e
Centre for Women’s Health, Gender and Society, Melbourne School of Population Health, University of Melbourne, Level
3/207 Bouverie Street, Carlton, VIC 3053, Australia
b

Abstract
Background: Little is known about the engagement of pharmacy assistants (PA) in public health service
provision.
Objective: To explore the experiences of PA participating in a study to determine whether a cash reward,
oﬀered to consumers and pharmacy businesses, increased participation in community pharmacy-based
chlamydia screening.
Methods: PA experience of the study education and training package, participant recruitment and
conducting screening (providing information about chlamydia, specimen collection and handling urine
samples) were evaluated using knowledge assessment, a questionnaire and focus groups.
Results: Twenty PA participated in the study: 15 (75%) completed all education and training components,
20 (100%) completed the questionnaire and 10 (50%) attended a focus group. PA rated all education and

* Corresponding author. Discipline of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, Bruce, ACT 2601,
Australia. Tel.: þ61 2 6201 2254; fax: þ61 2 6201 5727.
E-mail address: louise.deeks@canberra.edu.au, louise.deeks@hotmail.com (L.S. Deeks).
1551-7411/$ - see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sapharm.2013.11.006

2

Deeks et al. / Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy j (2013) 1–6

training components as eﬀective (mean visual analog scale scores O8.5). Most PA (13/18, 72.2%) did not
support/were unsure about continuing the program, citing the 25% repeat testing rate (presumed to relate
to the cash reward) and privacy/conﬁdentiality issues as reasons. Qualitative analysis suggested that
minimizing repeat testing, improved workload management and recognition of, and remuneration for,
education and training would make this model more acceptable to PA.
Conclusion: Findings from this study support the assertion that PA can play a signiﬁcant role in public
health initiatives.
Ó 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Chlamydia infection; Mass screening; Pharmacy; Public health; Pharmacy assistants

Introduction
Factors such as location, convenience, anonymity, extended opening hours and immediate
access to a qualiﬁed health professional contribute
to the increasing role community pharmacies are
playing in public health.1–4 Growth in this area is
constrained because service delivery usually relies
on the availability of pharmacists.5–7 Expanding
the role of paraprofessional staﬀ to deliver public
health services oﬀers one solution.8,9 Pharmacy
assistants (PA) are staﬀ trained to appropriately
sell pharmacy medicines, some are technicians or
dispensers. PA are the ‘public face’ of community
pharmacy. They are ideally placed to fulﬁll this
role as they constitute the majority of the pharmacy workforce, are generally the initial contact
for consumers and conduct the majority of health
triage interactions, but not all PA feel adequately
trained to expand their role.10
Studies show that pharmacy staﬀ can provide
public health services such as smoking cessation,6
weight management,11 sexual health,12 and drug
use,13,14 but few studies have determined PA attitudes toward this development.15 One New Zealand study found not all staﬀ wish to expand
their current roles,16 while in England, counter
staﬀ in 10 community pharmacies were receptive
to providing public health advice.17 During a study
designed to determine if a AUD10 cash reward
increased participation of males and females in
chlamydia screening in community pharmacies,
we explored the experiences of the PA involved.

Methods
This mixed methods study was approved by
research ethics committees of the Australian Capital
Territory Government Health Directorate, the
University of Canberra and the Australian National
University. Pharmacists and PA were asked to oﬀer

chlamydia screening to people aged 16–30 years
attending their pharmacy for any reason. Participants who returned a urine sample were rewarded
with AUD10. The study was advertised through
radio, television and print media. The uptake of
screening, and the views of the people screened for
chlamydia have been published elsewhere.18,19
The aim of this analysis was to explore the
experiences of PA exposed to a chlamydia education and training package, and determine their
involvement in recruiting and processing of study
participants.
The education and training package was undertaken during the three weeks before urine sample
collection began. It comprised two manuals written
by the research team speciﬁcally for the study and
practical training (including role play) in recruitment of young people. This was provided in each
study pharmacy by the research team. Manual 1
included chlamydia biology, transmission dynamics and treatment; manual 2 outlined the study
processes. The manuals were piloted on a convenience sample of ten PA and pharmacists and
modiﬁed according to feedback. Study pharmacists
oﬀered practical training to staﬀ working unsocial
hours. Knowledge uptake was assessed on completion of the package using a written quiz. Those
scoring 80% or more were eligible to recruit young
people to the study and were awarded an achievement certiﬁcate. At the end of the urine sample
collection phase of the study, all PA were asked to
anonymously complete a questionnaire concerning
their experiences. The research team conducted
three focus groups with pharmacists and PA to
further explore experiences. These were audiorecorded, transcribed verbatim and pharmacist
data were excluded from this analysis.
Quantitative outcome measures included the
number of PA receiving and completing the education and training package, the number of urine

Deeks et al. / Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy j (2013) 1–6
Table 1
Questions used in questionnaire and the focus group
Questionnaire qualitative questions
In preparing for involvement in this study you were
provided with education (manuals) and training (role
plays). Comment.
Before the CSiP studya began, when providing
contraception or thrush treatment, how frequently did
you discuss with your clients the risks associated with,
and treatment of, sexually transmissible infections
(STIs) such as chlamydia?
Do you think your participation in this study made you
more conﬁdent to discuss chlamydia and other STIs
with your clients?
How comfortable do you now feel discussing chlamydia
with clients?
What (if any) are the barriers to discussing chlamydia
with your clients?
How did you feel about handling clinical samples (i.e.
urine) in a community pharmacy?
Would you like your pharmacy to continue to oﬀer
chlamydia urine tests?
What do you believe are the beneﬁts of chlamydia
testing for your clients?
Is there anything else that you would like to tell us about
the chlamydia screening in pharmacies study?
Focus group questions
Have you told your friends or family that you were part
of the chlamydia program? What did you tell them?
What do you think are the beneﬁts of health testing in
community pharmacies for:
Patients?
Staﬀ?
Business?
Health of community?
Thinking from the point of view of a person who might
not know they should get tested for chlamydia, what
would encourage you to get tested?
What other things did patients ask about/talk about/buy
when they did the test?
How would you set up a health testing program in your
pharmacy? Who does it? After hours? Where? How
would you advertise it?
Anything else?
CSiP study ¼ chlamydia screening in pharmacies
study.
a

samples collected and quantiﬁable responses to
questionnaire items. The suﬃciency of each component of the education and training package was
assessed in the questionnaire using a 10 cm visual
analog scale (0 ¼ insuﬃcient and 10 ¼ suﬃcient).
Qualitative data were collected from the free text
comments elicited by the questionnaire and from
focus group transcripts (see Table 1). These data
were independently coded by two researchers to
identify key themes.

3

Results
Thirty-six PA from six pharmacies enrolled to
take part in the study. Of these, 20 (55%)
completed all components of the education and
training package and the post study questionnaire; 10 attended a focus group (Table 2). PA
enrolled the majority of young people into the
study. Most (95%) PA completing the questionnaire were female; 50% were aged 16–30 years.
All 20 PA scored O80% in the knowledge
assessment. The questionnaire mean suﬃciency
scores regarding manual 1 (chlamydia), manual 2
(study processes) and the training were 9.0 (range
7.9–10.0), 8.5 (range 5.5–10.0) and 8.8 (range 2.3–
10.0) respectively. See Table 3 for other quantitative questionnaire responses.
Themes derived from questionnaire free text and
focus groups
Qualitative analysis identiﬁed ﬁve themes:
These are listed with comments italicized and
separated by colons in the following text.
Value of education and training
Generally, PA were satisﬁed with the education and training: Very happy with the training: .
manuals very helpful and informative: made me
more conﬁdent that I could answer questions asked
by customers: (I suggest) longer training for pharmacy assistants with reduced conﬁdence.
Job satisfaction
Respondents reported satisfaction in oﬀering a
service beyond the existing service: Staﬀ feel like
they are involved in a real health issue, not just taking in scripts: (It was the) ﬁrst time some people
had been in a pharmacy. able to give them other
health messages: (I felt I was) helping the doctor:
a great experience: Some patients were really
appreciative of the information and help.
Feelings about taking on a new role
Some PA expressed discomfort with the sexual
health aspect of chlamydia screening: It (chlamydia
screening) should be oﬀered by a pharmacist not a
pharmacy assistant due to the knowledge required.
They suggested that transition to a new role be
facilitated by a staﬀ member who would take
overall responsibility: (You need a) hero member
of staﬀ with interest in subject: (A) dedicated staﬀ
member, a chlamydia champion. PA identiﬁed that
if they were going to extend their scope of practice, they would require (preferably ﬁnancial)
recognition of this: If we get paid for training
and (the) added workload.

Deeks et al. / Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy j (2013) 1–6

4

Table 2
Number of pharmacies, duration of trial, number of samples collected and PA participation
City

Number of pharmacies
Duration of study
Number of PA:
Enrolling In the study
Recruiting study participants
Completed training including roleplay
Completed assessment 1 (manual 1)
Completed assessment 2 (manual 2)
Completed the questionnaire
Attended a focus group
Number of urine samples collected by
pharmacy staﬀ
a

Suburban

Total

No. (%)

No. (%)

No. (%)

4
15 days

2
12 and 15 days

6
28 daysa

18
8 (40)
7 (35)

18
12 (60)
9 (45)

36
20 (100)
16 (80)

8
8
8
3
915

12
12
12
7
55

20
20
20
10
970

(40)
(40)
(40)
(30)
(94)

(60)
(60)
(60)
(70)
(6)

(100)
(100)
(100)
(from 671 individuals)

Screening was oﬀered over a total of 28 days, staggered in each pharmacy.

Ethical concerns
Cash reward. Some PA expressed concern about
the cash reward oﬀered to study participants.
They were especially concerned about the repeat
screeners who received the reward more than once.
It is very beneﬁcial in promoting awareness, but in my
experience 99% of the people testing were doing it
because of the money and hence a high volume of
repeated testers. It would be an idea if there was a
way that they could get tested by asking for ID
or recording on a database. This aspect of the
study aﬀected PA willingness to continue to oﬀer
screening. (Yes) but without the $10 because of the
repeat oﬀenders and people doing the wrong thing:
Participant privacy, anonymity and embarrassment. PA were concerned about privacy. A few
people were a little hesitant: they’d walk in and
sheepishly look around. There were conﬂicting
opinions on the need for privacy with some respondents noting that this did not appear to be
an issue for young people: . lack of privacy,
from my point of view, but a lot of clients did not
seem to be concerned: If anyone’s embarrassed
it’s us. PA suggested that city based pharmacies
oﬀered greater anonymity: It’s the anonymity in
the city. That’s why we get higher amounts of
EHC (emergency hormonal contraception). That’s
where I’d go.
Eﬀect on workload
The inﬂux of clients experienced during the
study exceeded expectations and no additional staﬀ
had been rostered to work. Staﬀ were anxious that

both study participant and pharmacy clients had to
wait for service. Often young people would arrive
en masse with PA ﬁnding it challenging to supervise these groups: When a group walked in I sensed
concern in staﬀ – lots noise and will they steal?: If one
person comes in – we are able to have a better relaxed
conversation; Staﬀ felt that presenting in groups
was normal behavior for this age group: Even girls
come in packs for the morning after pill.
Discussion
PA played a signiﬁcant role in this sexual
health study. We suggest that to maximize their
eﬀectiveness in public health roles, attention must
be paid to: identifying and meeting education and
training needs, exploring PA attitudes toward the
target population/s and the public health issue
being addressed, exploring options for appropriate
remuneration and including PA at every stage of
the change processes required to expand their role.
Staﬀ education and training contribute to the
delivery of safe, eﬀective, consistent and high
quality public health services in pharmacies20
and mechanisms to train all staﬀ are important
for compliance with standards and in facilitating
practice change.12,14–16 Providing the education
and training package for this study was labor
intensive, requiring multiple visits to pharmacies.
Extended opening hours, skill mix and the volume
of casual workers are all challenges to be overcome in presenting eﬀective education and
training in this setting. Strategies proposed by
participants in this and other studies include

Deeks et al. / Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy j (2013) 1–6
Table 3
Questionnaire item responses (N ¼ 20)
Question and possible
responses

Responses
No.

%

Did you recruit any participants to the CSiP study?
Yes
16
80
No
4
20
Before the CSiP studya began, when providing
contraception or thrush treatment, how frequently did
you discuss with your clients the risks associated with,
and treatment of, sexually transmissible infections
(STIs) such as chlamydia?
Never
15
75
Sometimes
5
25
Most of the time
0
0
Always
0
0
Not sure
0
0
How comfortable do you now feel discussing chlamydia
with clients?
Comfortable
9
45
Neither comfortable or
7
35
uncomfortable
Uncomfortable
4
20
What (if any) are the barriers to discussing chlamydia
with your clients? Please tick all that apply.
None
3
15
My workload
14
70
Lack of privacy
16
80
Lack of knowledge
3
15
My Embarrassment
3
15
Client’s embarrassment
18
90
My personal beliefs
0
0
Other
1
5
During the CSiP study, who were you most likely to oﬀer
a chlamydia test to?
Did not need to oﬀer
9
45
Clients in the target age
8
40
range (16–30 years)
1
5
Clients who asked for a
linked service such as
contraception, urinary
tract medications
No response
2
10
Would you like your pharmacy to continue to oﬀer
chlamydia urine tests?
Yes
7
35
No
3
15
Not sure
8
40
Did not respond
2
10
CSiP study ¼ chlamydia screening in pharmacies
study.
a

identifying and training a ‘champion’ worker,4,21
increasing recognition of skills through remuneration or career development opportunities17 and
exploring alternate training models such as
internet based packages.

5

Some PA were uncomfortable with the sexual
health nature of this study, but staﬀ embarrassment
was mitigated by the fact that most consumers
requested chlamydia screening rather than staﬀ
having to oﬀer it. This was the result of a very
successful multi-media advertising campaign and
word of mouth communication. While it is logical
that any public health services oﬀered in community
pharmacies are tailored to consumers, consideration needs to be given to the feelings and attitudes
and the demographic characteristics of pharmacy
staﬀ. While many PA expressed concern about
consumer privacy and embarrassment, they were
mindful that most participants were unconcerned.
The nature of this intervention challenged the
health beliefs of some of the PAs due to the
ﬁnancial reward. PAs have limited regular remuneration and this may have led to resentment
toward handing cash to their consumers in exchange for a urine sample. The lack of understanding by PAs of the impact of poor public
health on the whole population and its costs in
context of the small cash rewards oﬀered, may
have needed to be emphasized more in the education. A more tangible recognition of each PA
role in the service, in addition to the certiﬁcate
and post participation morning tea, should be
considered in future service development.
Involving staﬀ in designing a program to
remove or mitigate barriers improves the likelihood of the service succeeding22 and previous
research has identiﬁed the lack of engagement of
pharmacy staﬀ as a limiting factor in providing
public health services.10,12,15–17,21 In our study,
PA expressed mixed feelings about continuing
chlamydia screening with some reporting increased
job satisfaction, while others reported barriers to
continuation. PA suggested mechanisms to overcome the volume of inappropriate repeat screeners
including using an electronic database to record
participants’ details (similar to that used to
monitor amphetamine purchases) and checking
photo ID. This, and concerns about the rapid
and unpredicted increase in workload, could be addressed by specifying a screening time (e.g. Chlamydia Week) when extra staﬀ are rostered on
and dedicated to the screening program.
Our results may not be generalizable to all
pharmacies given our study was conducted in only
one Australian city (population 350,000) and did
not include pharmacies in rural or remote areas.
However, it is hoped that the experiences of PA
reported here provide useful insights into the
participation of this workforce in chlamydia

6

Deeks et al. / Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy j (2013) 1–6

education and screening which may be translated
to other pharmacy-based public health initiatives.
Conclusion
PA experiences in this study support the assertion that this workforce can play a signiﬁcant role in
delivering public health services. PAs were satisﬁed
with their education and training and were receptive
to expanding their public health role. They rapidly
recruited a large number of young people of both
sexes to be screened for chlamydia, but expressed
some concerns. Implementation of strategies to
minimize the number of repeat testers, better
manage the pharmacy workload and promote and
recognize PA training with appropriate remuneration would make this model more acceptable to PA.
To maximize the eﬀectiveness of this workforce,
training and service design should be responsive to
their needs and PA should be involved in the
changes required in their pharmacy to introduce
public health services to maximum beneﬁt.
References
1. Walker R. Pharmaceutical public health: the end of
pharmaceutical care? Pharm J 2000;264:340–341.
2. Bush J, Langley CA, Wilson KA. The corporatization of community pharmacy: implications for service
provision, the public health function, and pharmacy’s
claims to professional status in the United Kingdom.
Res Soc Adm Pharm 2009;5:305–318.
3. Watson MC, Sheridan J. Drugs, sex. and alcohol?
Extending the community pharmacist’s public health
role. Int J Pharm Pract 2011;19:217–218.
4. Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee.
Community Pharmacy: At the Heart of Public Health,
2010. Available at: http://psnc.org.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2013/08/Public-health-Introduction.pdf. Accessed 04.12.12.
5. Eades CE, Ferguson JS, O’Carroll RE. Public health
in community pharmacy: a systematic review of
pharmacist and consumer views. BMC Public Health
2011;11. Art. No.582.
6. Laliberté MC, Perreault S, Damestoy N, Lalonde L.
Ideal and actual involvement of community pharmacists in health promotion and prevention: a crosssectional study in Quebec, Canada. BMC Public
Health 2012;12. Art. No.192.
7. Brabin L, Thomas G, Hopkins M, O’Brien K,
Roberts SA. Delivery of chlamydia screening to young
women requesting emergency hormonal contraception
at pharmacies in Manchester, UK: a prospective study.
BMC Womens Health 2009;9. Art. No. 7.
8. Stone M, Wilcock M, Harding G. Pharmacy assistants have great potential to champion public health.
Pharm J 2011;287:194.

9. Zillich AJ, Aquilino ML, Farris KB. Knowledge and
attitudes about smoking cessation among pharmacy
technicians. J Am Pharm Assoc 2004;44:578–582.
10. Kapadia MZ, Warner P, Fairhurst K, Muir A,
Glasier A. Assessing competencies and training needs
of pharmacy staﬀ to deliver chlamydia screening in
community pharmacies. J Pharm Health Serv Res
2012;3:221–228.
11. Newlands RS, Watson MC, Lee AJ. The provision of
current and future healthy weight management
(HWM) services from community pharmacies: a survey of community pharmacists’ attitudes, practice
and future possibilities. Int J Pharm Pract 2011;19:
106–114.
12. Dabrera G, Pinson D, Whiteman S. Chlamydia
screening by community pharmacists: a qualitative
study. J Fam Plann Reprod Health Care 2010;37:
17–21.
13. Scott J, Mackridge AJ. Pharmacy support staﬀ
involvement in, and attitudes towards, pharmacybased services for drug misusers. Int J Pharm Pract
2009;17:325–332.
14. MacKridge AJ, Scott J. Experiences, attitudes and
training needs of pharmacy support staﬀ providing
services to drug users in Great Britain: a qualitative
study experiences and training needs of UK pharmacy support staﬀ. J Subst Use 2009;14:375–384.
15. Sheridan J, Kelly F, Basheer M, Jan R, Lee A. Can I
help you? A qualitative study of pharmacist and
pharmacy assistant views on the role of pharmacy assistants in New Zealand. Int J Pharm Pract 2012;19:
228–235.
16. Braund R, Chesney KM, Keast EP, et al. Are all
pharmacy staﬀ interested in potential future roles?
Int J Pharm Pract 2012;20:417–421.
17. Harding G, Stone M, Wilcock M. A public health
role for counter staﬀ. Pharm J 2012;289:609.
18. Currie MJ, Deeks LS, Cooper GM, et al. Community
pharmacy and cash reward: a winning combination
for chlamydia screening? Sex Transm Infect 2013;
89:212–216.
19. Parker RM, Bell A, Currie MJ, et al. ‘Catching Chlamydia’: combining cash incentives and community
pharmacy access for increased chlamydia screening,
the view of young people. Aust J Prim Health;
2013. http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/PY12135. published
early online; Accessed 11.11.13.
20. Pharmaceutical Society of Australia. Professional
Practice Standards – Version 4, 2010. Available at:
http://www.psa.org.au/supporting-practice/profession
al-practice-standards. Accessed 04.12.12.
21. Emmerton L, Skinner MB, Gardiner E, Nissen L,
Debattista J. A trial of the distribution of chlamydia
self-collection postal specimen kits from Australian
community pharmacies. Sex Health 2011;8:130–132.
22. Roberts AS, Benrimoj SI, Chen TF, Williams KA,
Aslani P. Practice change in community pharmacy:
quantiﬁcation of facilitators. Ann Pharmacother
2008;42:861–868.

