Alzheimer’s & Dementia - (2016) 1-8


Review Article

From big data to smart data in Alzheimer’s disease. The brain health
modeling initiative to foster actionable knowledge
Hugo Geertsa,*, Penny A. Dacksb, Viswanath Devanarayanc, Magali Haasd,
Zaven Khatchaturiane, Mark Forrest Gordonf, Stuart Maudsleyg, Klaus Romeroh,
Diane Stephensonh, and on behalf of the Brain Health Modeling Initiative (BHMI)
In Silico Biosciences, Inc., Berwyn, PA, USA
Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, New York, NY, USA

Exploratory Statistics, AbbVie, Souderton, PA, USA

Orion Bionetworks, Inc., Cambridge MA, USA

PAD2020, Potomac, MD, USA

Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Ridgefield, CT, USA

VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium

C-Path Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA

Abstract

Massive investment and technological advances in the collection of extensive and longitudinal information on thousands of Alzheimer patients results in large amounts of data. These “big-data” databases can potentially advance CNS research and drug development. However, although necessary,
they are not sufficient, and we posit that they must be matched with analytical methods that go beyond
retrospective data-driven associations with various clinical phenotypes. Although these empirically
derived associations can generate novel and useful hypotheses, they need to be organically integrated
in a quantitative understanding of the pathology that can be actionable for drug discovery and development. We argue that mechanism-based modeling and simulation approaches, where existing
domain knowledge is formally integrated using complexity science and quantitative systems pharmacology can be combined with data-driven analytics to generate predictive actionable knowledge for
drug discovery programs, target validation, and optimization of clinical development.
Ó 2016 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the Alzheimer’s Association. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Keywords:

Brain disorders; Alzheimer’s dementia; Complexity theory; Systems pharmacology; Systems biology; Drug
discovery and development

1. Background
Among all the enduring disabling conditions of our
increasingly aged society, chronic brain disorders, such as dementia/Alzheimer’s disease (AD), are the leading contributors
to spiraling health care costs as well as individual and caregiver burden. Leading health organizations across the world
have estimated that brain disorders (neurological, psychiatric,
brain injury, or pain) will affect one in five individuals in their

*Corresponding author. Tel.: 11-267-679-8090; Fax: ---.
E-mail address: Hugo-Geerts@In-Silico-Biosciences.com

lifetime with an associated cost of more than 2 trillion US dollars annually in the United States and Europe alone [1]. This
exceeds the annual combined burden of cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes, and it is expected to rise with
increasing life expectancy. Among these brain disorders, dementia represents one of the largest burdens to our aging societies [2], afflicting more than 35 million people worldwide [3].
Today, there are no effective therapies for these conditions,
despite enormous financial and research investments. This reality has galvanized a global effort launched by the G8 Summit on Dementia in 2014; however, we suggest that the large
investment in research and development can substantially
benefit from integrative predictive modeling.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2016.04.008
1552-5260/Ó 2016 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the Alzheimer’s Association. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
REV 5.4.0 DTD  JALZ2175_proof  25 May 2016  12:48 pm  ce
H. Geerts et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia - (2016) 1-8


From 2002 to 2012, 99.6% of the clinical trials of diseasemodifying treatments for AD have failed [4]. In stark
contrast, between 1995 and 2010, approximately 300 interventions were reported to reduce pathology and/or improve
behavior in transgenic AD mouse models [5]. Although
changes in preclinical animal research design might somewhat improve the predictive value of these animal models
[6], rodents will continue to be fundamentally different
from humans [7].
AD is inherently a multifactorial syndrome, and individual patients present with a wide variety of pathologies, as a
consequence of comorbidities, life history, and genotypes
(Fig 1). In fact, neuropathologic evidence suggests that
different pathologies converge in the brains of elderly people
with dementia [8,9]. This suggests that the biological
processes driving the clinical phenotype can differ
markedly from patient to patient. In addition, up to onethird of nondemented, high-functioning seniors may harbor
underlying pathology to an extent that would be expected to
cause dementia. So far reductionist molecular biological approaches have failed to explain this phenomenon [9].
The complexity of clinical trials for AD has also contributed to the therapeutic failure rate. The clinical outcome
metrics related to cognition and function are highly variable,
not only due to the inherent variability in the pathological
processes (see above), but also the impact of comedications and genotypes both within and across patient
groups, necessitating large sample size and treatment duration to detect remediation. New modeling efforts such as
the precompetitive consortium, the Coalition Against Major
Diseases, can help develop tools to optimize the efficiency of
clinical trial design [10]. Biomarkers can quantify neuropathology and its progression but the use of single molecular
biomarkers in isolation has unfortunately not successfully
predicted the functional and cognitive outcomes relevant
to patients.

the trial design rather than the targets, and that the solution
is to conduct trials in prodromal conditions [11]. However,
the assumption that “reducing beta-amyloid load” leads to
cognitive improvement is probably a major oversimplification of the complex biology of beta-amyloid in the human
AD brain that we are gradually starting to understand.
Recent studies indeed document different aggregation dynamics [12], different formation and clearance in the human
brain [13], different neuroprotective versus neurotoxic properties of the shorter versus longer amyloid peptides [14], and
the complex nonlinear interaction of co-medications and genotypes on clinical cognitive readouts [15]. In other words,
even if beta-amyloid is the correct therapeutic target, successful drug development will likely require a more sophisticated understanding of its complex dynamics. In addition,
nonamyloid processes such as tau pathology, neuroinflammation, and oxidative stress interact with beta-amyloid
physiology resulting most likely in an idiosyncratic cognitive trajectory for each AD patient.
With the development of systems biology, the concept of
circuit and network insights was combined with multivariate
analyses, resulting in an integrative approach that starts with
the patient. It “is about putting together rather than taking
apart, integration rather than reduction. It requires that we
develop ways of thinking about integration that are as
rigorous as our reductionist programs, but different.It
means changing our philosophy, in the full sense of the
term” [16]. Quantitative systems pharmacology (QSP)
goes one step further by adding formalized domain expertise
about the biological nature such as enzyme kinetics and
interaction between drugs and targets of the different parts
of key circuits and pathways. In this way, causation is explicitly integrated in the modeling. In the case of central nervous
system (CNS) disorders, QSP also integrates this information into biophysically realistic neuronal networks, the firing
properties of which can be associated with a clinical phenotype [17].

2. From reductionism to integration
The prevailing paradigm for scientific inquiry in the
neuroscience field has used classical reductionism, an
approach wherein explanation of entire systems is predicated in terms of their individual, constituent parts, and their
interactions. This molecular biology approach, often based
on data-driven correlation analysis, is basically a bottomup strategy, where the resulting outcome is defined usually
as a consequence of a single set of linear assumptions.
This often negates the many nonlinear interactions between
subsystems and the appearance of emergent properties that
cannot be reduced to a single target.
The case of beta-amyloid modulation as a therapeutic
approach for AD illustrates the problems associated with a
statistical approach that correlates a clinical phenotype
with genetic information. The most optimistic perspective
on the failure of this approach is that these trials have been
conducted too late in the course of the disease, a failure in

3. From big data to smart data
As part of the new approaches to reduce clinical trial failure rates, global efforts are now shifting toward a focus on
gathering “big data” [18]. The integration of large clinical
data sets is viewed as a potentially powerful approach to
expedite medical discovery, and there is justifiable enthusiasm based on results of global studies of disease progression and large-scale genomics efforts [19]. Advanced deep
analytical approaches have been developed and are covered
by other publications in the field of bioinformatics [20,21]
and pharmacology [22]; however, specific case studies for
brain disease are limited and these publications are typically
written for a very narrow specialty audience.
These large-scale data collection efforts, such as the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) consortium,
and the European initiatives (http://www.alzheimers.org.
uk/site/scripts/download_info.php? fileID52273) will yield

REV 5.4.0 DTD  JALZ2175_proof  25 May 2016  12:48 pm 

H. Geerts et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia - (2016) 1-8

Fig. 1. Illustration of different pathological processes (by no means exhaustive) occurring in the AD brain and how they putatively interact to lead to the same
clinical phenotype. Such drawings are often used by scientists to “formalize” their hypotheses and identify the relationship between different processes. It integrates information from big data studies (e.g., GWAS) with insights about the underlying neurobiology. The purpose of mechanism-based modeling and simulation is to bring these relationships to life by simulating time-dependent and concentration-dependent changes based on equations that describe the specific
biochemical processes and ultimately constrained by a number of clinical phenotypes (right side). For instance, synaptic activity dependent formation of
beta-amyloid peptides can be simulated (see text) using data constrained by human SILK studies, appropriate enzyme properties, and the forward and backward
rate constants of peptide oligomerization. Such models could, in principle, also simulate in a quantitative fashion the impact of therapeutic interventions at
specific points in the diagram and therefore support drug discovery and development programs.

maximal impact if they are combined with advanced predictive modeling approaches where existing domain expertise
is formally integrated. We call this approach “turning big
data into smart data” with the idea of generating actionable
knowledge that could help us in developing new treatment
paradigms. This provocative title is intended to highlight
the link between the world of “data-information” and the
realm of actionable “knowledge”—thus the concept of
smart data.
4. Modeling and simulation in pharma and other
industries
Across many fields of science and physics, modeling and
simulation have come to complement theory and experiment
as a key component of the scientific method. Computer aided
design is a technology commonly used in many engineering
disciplines to generate in silico prototypes that are extensively simulated before the actual prototype is built and
lead to much higher success rates and shorter cycle development times in automotive, aeronautics, and micro-electronic
industries. High-energy physicists use computer models
such as Geant4 (https://geant4.web.cern.ch/geant4/), based

on physical principles to generate knowledge from the
massive amount of information (100 terabytes/day) gathered
in large particle accelerators to better understand the complex nature of the universe.
In pharmaceutical industry, mechanism-based modeling
and simulation have become mainstream in other disease
indications such as metabolic disorders, toxicology, and
oncology. Physiology-based pharmacokinetic modeling,
which uses mechanism-based equations rather than empirical methods [23], is now part of the growing toolbox of the
pharmaceutical industry and is increasingly being accepted
by regulatory agencies [24,25]. As an example, DILISym,
a complex physiology-based computer model or QSP
model of liver injury [26], has been tested extensively
and is used by pharmaceutical companies to detect early
signs of liver toxicity. Although hard numbers are difficult
to come by, informal testimonies reveal that this QSP
approach can accelerate clinical development by several
months while substantially increasing the probabilities of
success. In another example, a mechanism-based QSP
model of cognitive impairment correctly predicted an unexpected clinical proof-of-concept for a clinical candidate
for AD and identified a back-up compound that could

REV 5.4.0 DTD  JALZ2175_proof  25 May 2016  12:48 pm  ce
H. Geerts et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia - (2016) 1-8

possibly have saved a complete clinical development
program [27].
The fact that large pharmaceutical companies see value in
computer-based mechanistic modeling is further underscored by the recent announcement that Rosa, a company
providing modeling and simulation capabilities, has signed
a multiyear worldwide multi-indication contract with Sanofi
Global R&D (http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
rosa–co-announces-multi-year-world-wide-physiopd-rese
arch-agreement-with-sanofi-300089963.html).
5. The brain and complexity theory
The examples of CAD and high-energy physics illustrate
the power of applying first principles based on the understanding of the nature of the processes and formalized in a
mathematical manner to elucidate emergent properties that
are difficult to relate to one specific and unique process.
This form of complexity theory includes tipping points (moments when unique phenomena become commonplace) and
emergence (the idea that new structures can emerge unexpectedly from complex systems).
For example, experimental electrophysiological data on
pharmacological manipulations of working memory [28]
can best be explained by attractor dynamics [29], where the

system dynamically settles into one of several states, and
“escape” rates can be affected by disease state (such as
“perseverance”). These studies suggest a novel hypothesis
to explain some of the nonlinear dose-responses observed
in the clinic, especially around dopamine modulation [30].
On the other hand, the clinical observation from deep brain
recordings in Parkinson’s disease patients that motor symptoms are not related to firing frequencies, but to complex
oscillatory behavior of local field potentials [31] is an
example of an unexpected emergent property that cannot be
reduced to a single target. This has led to a better understanding and optimization of deep-brain stimulation protocols.
Other examples of this nascent field include the association of brain health with fractality of the alpha rhythm of human EEG [32,33], the realization that chaotic behavior of
neuronal networks is associated with healthy functioning
[34,35], and the global emergence of cognition from social
and neural cooperation [36].
Complexity science can help researchers to understand
the causal relationships between molecular events (lower
levels of complexity) and clinical expression of neurodegeneration (higher level of complexity; see for example Fig 2),
by developing simulation platforms that link the pathogenesis of dementia with the clinical features of the disease
such as cognitive impairment.

Fig. 2. Illustration of the multimodal processes that describe the complexity of going from a single gene (in this case, the huntingtin gene) to fully understand the
pathology that leads to the multiple clinical phenotypes in Huntington’s disease patients. The increasing complexity when going from one level to the next
necessitates the introduction of advanced mathematical modeling and simulation approaches that fully embraces nonlinear and stochastic descriptions of
the neurophysiological processes that ultimately leads to clinical phenotypes. For example, although the basic driver of the pathology is the mutated huntingtin
gene, its effects on behavior are related in complex nonlinear ways to other processes to the point that is not clear what the optimal target modulation approach
would be. In addition, environmental factors or other genotypes likely affect the relative contribution of these pathologic processes to the clinical phenotype.
REV 5.4.0 DTD  JALZ2175_proof  25 May 2016  12:48 pm  ce

H. Geerts et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia - (2016) 1-8

6. Defining the questions to be asked in AD
It is also important to realize that several scientific questions need to be addressed with different levels of detail in
various models. For purely empirical relationships (e.g.,
what genotypes drive a specific phenotype), deep analytical
approaches based on sound statistical modeling and
machine-learning principles are probably sufficient. For
more predictive and biological questions that are not readily
apparent from existing databases (e.g., how to therapeutically affect biological processes that will impact the clinical
phenotype in a specific patient population), extensive neurobiological domain expertise needs to be fully and formally
integrated. Fig 1 illustrates a possible strategy on how the information from big data analytics can be combined with
mechanism-based modeling to generate an advanced and
realistic computational platform for AD. The purpose of
the modeling is to bring the arrows (relations) between
different agents in the pathology to “life,” by using first principles about the underlying biology and explicitly simulating
their time-dependent and concentration-dependent impact
on the whole network. This will help to better define the causality between different biological processes and in relation
to the different clinical phenotypes. Further constraining the
parameters with clinical data will improve the predictability
of such models.
The heterogeneity of AD suggests that interventions to
treat or prevent it will be effective in some but not all patient subpopulations. For example, the omega-3 fatty acid
docohexaenoic acid (DHA) has been tested as a therapy to
treat or prevent AD. Trials have generally failed, but secondary analysis of a clinical trial in AD patients reported
Q4 that APOE4 noncarriers benefited, whereas APOE4 carriers did not [37]. Additional evidence from observational
studies [38], animal studies [39], and DHA pharmacokinetic experiments in humans [40,41] indicate that the
APOE genotype alters the response to DHA
supplementation and should be considered in clinical
trials testing the efficacy of DHA for AD treatment or
prevention. Although this finding was based on a
statistical post hoc modeling of clinical results; the
challenge is to turn this into a better understanding of
the biological processes driving this outcome, so that
possibly new targets can be identified and validated.
Below are some concrete objectives for which the integration of bioinformatics, statistical modeling, complexity
science, and deep analytics could revolutionize therapy
development.
1) What biomarkers or combinations of biomarkers hold
most promise for tracking with clinically meaningful
change in AD trials? For example, what changes could
be detected in a 3-month period in patients and how
can this help us better understand the longer term clinical trajectory of AD patient subgroups, develop therapeutics, and design clinical trials?

5

2) What biomarkers can be used to help identify patient
subgroups, differential diagnosis, and disease progression? Can the integration of complexity models with
other analytical methods help identify biomarkers that
will distinguish between subgroups to differentially
predict disease progression, predict disease risk in
asymptomatic populations, design more robust clinical
trials with relatively homogeneous and clinically more
relevant populations, and identify patient subpopulations most likely to benefit from a given therapeutic?
3) How can we support the discovery of new therapeutics
that appropriately modulate key pathways associated
with specific biomarkers that define a patient subpopulation and therefore will most likely be of benefit? In
what direction and to what degree do we need to affect
specific pathway(s) to generate a clinically significant
improvement? In view of the limited efficacy of highly selective therapeutic interventions, how can we
optimize combination therapies that have a substantial
impact on the cognitive trajectory?
4) How can we conduct trials on virtual human patients
to improve development of drugs for AD patients
with different co-medications and genotypes?
7. Brain health modeling initiative: Rationale
We strongly believe that generating actionable knowledge from these data sets is essential to develop new
and effective treatment paradigms. To this end, we have
established the Brain Health Modeling Initiative
(BHMI). The objective of this initiative is to accelerate
biomarker and therapeutic development by raising the
awareness of integrative analytics and mechanism-based
computational approaches that optimize the use of complex big data to generate a more accurate and actionable
understanding of the disease. This may in turn lead to
the development of more effective therapies or more effectively screen for patients with AD-specific pathology or an
improved match between therapeutic targets and biomarkers that might help effect the promise of “precision
medicine” [42] and therefore help deliver the right drug
to the right patients.
We propose to address these issues by rationally integrating advanced modeling and simulation approaches
with analytical algorithms from big data studies. Deep analytic approaches can identify complex relationships from
mining existing clinical data, whereas mechanism-based disease modeling using complexity science can simulate how
the emergent properties of a system (e.g., the clinical syndrome of dementia) emerge from the interaction of these
diverse-related variables so that the right target for the patient population with that specific biomarker can be identified, validated, and optimally modulated.
As an example whereby mechanism-based modeling approaches can be combined with insights from bioinformatics, a computer model to identify vulnerability nodes of

REV 5.4.0 DTD  JALZ2175_proof  25 May 2016  12:48 pm  ce

H. Geerts et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia - (2016) 1-8


Fig. 3. Steps for building predictive models. Starting from integrated databases, causal relationships can be identified using not only statistical analysis but also
approaches where domain expertise is formalized. These relationships can be tested in biological experiments, together with clinical neuroimaging and neuropathology data and quantitative complex computer models can be developed. Parameters of this model are constrained by clinical data, and predictions can then
be tested against actual clinical outcomes. We anticipate a series of interactive steps that will ultimately result in more complex and predictive models.

tau neurophysiology was developed [43] based on biological
principles, but where the constraints for the transition rates
between the different tau states are informed by an a priori
identifiability approach [43,44] commonly used in
bioinformatics studies.
Fig 3 shows a general overview on how to bridge the
world of experimental observation to deep analytics and
insight-providing modeling and simulation, in an iterative
cycle to generate better knowledge.
The mathematical toolbox for applying this network
systems biology conceptual framework to brain diseases
is still nascent and requires investment to realize its full
potential.
In a series of perspective articles, we will explore the scientific, operational, and computational challenges and opportunities to use these approaches for brain-related data
and chart a path to implement these novel technologies to
accelerate the discovery of new and effective therapeutic interventions. The ultimate goal is to combine the best tools of
the various computational approaches to develop a multiscale complex predictive modeling platform.
These position articles will discuss the rationale for
generating actionable knowledge from the many databases

that are currently being collected, the unique data challenges, as well as new opportunities.
The analytics toolbox aims to provide high-level explanations of various computational algorithmic approaches available today.
Case studies will highlight valuable examples in which
predictive modeling tools ranging from statistical modeling
and deep analytics over pathway-guided correlation analysis
to mechanism-based modeling have already been applied for
the identification of prognostic and diagnostic biomarkers
and clinical outcomes of new therapies in CNS disorders.
Operational challenges, such as data standardization and
quality control, will address actionability with the aim of
defining the big data requirements of clinical trials (experimental data) and epidemiology/demography/public health
(observational data), outline the respective resourceinfrastructure requirement of these two worlds, and suggest
a roadmap to bridge the gap between these related endeavors.
Modeling applications will illustrate the viewpoints of
pharmaceutical companies, regulatory agencies, and other
major stakeholders regarding the use of predictive modeling
in rational drug discovery and development, combination
therapies, and the repurposing of old drugs.

REV 5.4.0 DTD  JALZ2175_proof  25 May 2016  12:48 pm  ce

H. Geerts et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia - (2016) 1-8


References

8. Conclusion
Around the world, unprecedented amounts of data are
being collected with diverse content ranging from the genetic and molecular “omics” to the clinical phenotypes of
patients in their doctor’s office. Big data could revolutionize the development of effective treatments for AD
but only if such data are turned into actionable knowledge.
Integrative mechanism-based predictive platforms using
complexity science have successfully led to scientific advances in other fields. Such advanced algorithms when
combined with big data information could similarly
advance AD research and development by creating a
system-based understanding of this heterogeneous disease
to predict which molecular targets (and corresponding
drugs) will yield clinical benefit in which patients and to
improve the clinical development success rate. The BHMI
is an open call to action to share information on analytic approaches, address operational challenges, and develop new
modeling applications that can transform “big data” into
“smart data” and help bring the right drugs to the right patients in the shortest amount of time.

RESEARCH IN CONTEXT

1. Systematic review: In this invited review, we challenge current approaches for understanding complex
disease conditions, such as Alzheimer’s disease
(AD). Specifically, we explore the potential for
modeling and more advanced computational methodologies to generate actionable knowledge that
will support AD drug research and development.
This article integrates multiple views by clinical, systems biology, and computational modeling experts
on the contentious question of whether reductionist
scientific methods alone can solve the challenges
we face in developing therapeutics.
2. Interpretation: Given the inherent complexity of AD
pathology, and challenges in working with big data,
we propose that bringing in formalized domain
expertise and novel analytic approaches is a possible
solution to this problem.
3. Future directions: This article is intended to raise
awareness of the problems and issues associated
with translating insights from big data into actionable
outcomes and outlines the principles on which we
developed a series of articles with the objective of informing and educating the scientific community
about various computational methods that are not
widely used today.

[1] Gustavsson A, Svensson M, Jacobi F, Allgulander C, Alonso J,
Beghi E, et al. Cost of disorders of the brain in Europe 2010. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2011;21:718–79.
[2] Hurd MD, Martorell P, Delavande A, Mullen KJ, Langa KM. Monetary costs of dementia in the United States. N Engl J Med 2013;
368:1326–34.
[3] Plassman BL, Langa KM, Fisher GG, Heeringa SG, Weir DR,
Ofstedal MB, et al. Prevalence of dementia in the United States: the
aging, demographics, and memory study. Neuroepidemiology 2007;
29:125–32.
[4] Cummings JL, Morstorf T, Zhong K. Alzheimer’s disease drugdevelopment pipeline: few candidates, frequent failures. Alzheimers
Res Ther 2014;6:37.
[5] Zahs KR, Ashe KH. ‘Too much good news’ - are Alzheimer mouse
models trying to tell us how to prevent, not cure, Alzheimer’s disease?
Trends Neurosci 2010;33:381–9.
[6] Shineman DW, Basi GS, Bizon JL, Colton CA, Greenberg BD,
Hollister BA, et al. Accelerating drug discovery for Alzheimer’s disease: best practices for preclinical animal studies. Alzheimers Res
Ther 2011;3:28.
[7] Geerts H. Of mice and men: bridging the translational disconnect in
CNS drug discovery. CNS Drugs 2009;23:915–26.
[8] Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, Leurgans SE, Bennett DA. The neuropathology of probable Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment.
Ann Neurol 2009;66:200–8.
[9] Bennett DA, Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, Kelly JF, Aggarwal NT,
Shah RC, et al. Neuropathology of older persons without cognitive
impairment from two community-based studies. Neurology 2006;
66:1837–44.
[10] Romero K, Ito K, Rogers JA, Polhamus D, Qiu R, Stephenson D, et al.
The future is now: model-based clinical trial design for Alzheimer’s
disease. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2015;97:210–4.
[11] Panza F, Solfrizzi V, Imbimbo BP, Tortelli R, Santamato A,
Logroscino G. Amyloid-based immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s disease in the time of prevention trials: the way forward. Expert Rev
Clin Immunol 2014;10:405–19.
[12] Garai K, Frieden C. Quantitative analysis of the time course of Abeta
oligomerization
and
subsequent
growth
steps
using
tetramethylrhodamine-labeled Abeta. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2013;110:3321–6.
[13] Potter R, Patterson BW, Elbert DL, Ovod V, Kasten T,
Sigurdson W, et al. Increased in vivo amyloid-beta42 production,
exchange, and loss in presenilin mutation carriers. Sci Transl
Med 2013;5:189ra77.
[14] Wang Y, Zhou TH, Zhi Z, Barakat A, Hlatky L, Querfurth H. Multiple
effects of beta-amyloid on single excitatory synaptic connections in
the PFC. Front Cell Neurosci 2013;7:129.
[15] Geerts H, Spiros A, Roberts P. Assessing the synergy between cholinomimetics and memantine as augmentation therapy in cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. A virtual human patient trial using quantitative
systems pharmacology. Front Pharmacol 2015;6:198.
[16] Smith N, Noble D. Knowledge capture and the responsibility: past and
present. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 2008;96:1–2.
[17] Roberts PD, Spiros A, Geerts H. Simulations of symptomatic treatments for Alzheimer’s disease: computational analysis of pathology
and mechanisms of drug action. Alzheimers Res Ther 2012;4:50.
[18] Husain M. Big data: could it ever cure Alzheimer’s disease? Brain
2014;137:2623–4.
[19] Saykin AJ, Shen L, Yao X, Kim S, Nho K, Risacher SL, et al. Genetic
studies of quantitative MCI and AD phenotypes in ADNI: Progress,
opportunities, and plans. Alzheimers Dement 2015;11:792–814.
[20] Choi IY, Kim TM, Kim MS, Mun SK, Chung YJ. Perspectives on clinical informatics: integrating large-scale clinical, genomic, and health
information for clinical care. Genomics Inform 2013;11:186–90.

REV 5.4.0 DTD  JALZ2175_proof  25 May 2016  12:48 pm  ce

H. Geerts et al. / Alzheimer’s & Dementia - (2016) 1-8

[21] Bai JP, Abernethy DR. Systems pharmacology to predict drug toxicity:
integration across levels of biological organization. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2013;53:451–73.
[22] Maudsley S, Martin B, Janssens J, Etienne H, Jushaj A, van Gastel J, et al.
Informatic deconvolution of biased GPCR signaling mechanisms from
in vivo pharmacological experimentation. Methods 2016;92:51–63.
[23] Schmitt W, Willmann S. Physiology-based pharmacokinetic
modeling: ready to be used. Drug Discov Today Technol 2004;
1:449–56.
[24] Sinha V, Zhao P, Huang SM, Zineh I. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling: from regulatory science to regulatory policy.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 2014;95:478–80.
[25] Peterson MC, Riggs MM. FDA Advisory meeting clinical pharmacology review utilizes a quantitative systems pharmacology (QSP)
model: a watershed moment? CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol
2015;4:e00020.
[26] Bhattacharya S, Shoda LK, Zhang Q, Woods CG, Howell BA,
Siler SQ, et al. Modeling drug- and chemical-induced hepatotoxicity
with systems biology approaches. Front Physiol 2012;3:462.
[27] Nicholas T, Duvvuri S, Leurent C, Raunig D, Rapp T, Iredale R, et al.
Systems pharmacology modeling in neuroscience: prediction and
outcome of PF-04995274, a 5HT4 partial agonist, in a clinical scopolamine impairment trial. Adv Alzheimers Dis 2013;2:83–98.
[28] Lapish CC, Balaguer-Ballester E, Seamans JK, Phillips AG,
Durstewitz D. Amphetamine exerts dose-dependent changes in prefrontal cortex attractor dynamics during working memory. J Neurosci
2015;35:10172–87.
[29] Durstewitz D, Seamans J. Beyond bistability: Biophysics and temporal
dynamics of working memory. Neuroscience 2006;139:119–33.
[30] Chou HH, Talledo JA, Lamb SN, Thompson WK, Swerdlow NR.
Amphetamine effects on MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery performance in healthy adults. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2013;
227:165–76.
[31] Little S, Pogosyan A, Neal S, Zavala B, Zrinzo L, Hariz M, et al. Adaptive deep brain stimulation in advanced Parkinson disease. Ann Neurol
2013;74:449–57.
[32] Zueva MV. Fractality of sensations and the brain health: the theory
linking neurodegenerative disorder with distortion of spatial and temporal scale-invariance and fractal complexity of the visible world.
Front Aging Neurosci 2015;7:135.

[33] Lehnertz K. Non-linear time series analysis of intracranial EEG recordings in patients with epilepsy–an overview. Int J Psychophysiol
1999;34:45–52.
[34] Korn H, Faure P. Is there chaos in the brain? II. Experimental evidence
and related models. C R Biol 2003;326:787–840.
[35] Plenz D, Thiagarajan TC. The organizing principles of neuronal avalanches: cell assemblies in the cortex? Trends Neurosci 2007;
30:101–10.
[36] Grigolini P, Piccinini N, Svenkeson A, Pramukkul P, Lambert D,
West BJ. From neural and social cooperation to the global emergence
of cognition. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 2015;3:78.
[37] Quinn JF, Raman R, Thomas RG, Yurko-Mauro K, Nelson EB, Van
Dyck C, et al. Docosahexaenoic acid supplementation and cognitive
decline in Alzheimer disease: a randomized trial. JAMA 2010;
304:1903–11.
[38] Huang TL. Omega-3 fatty acids, cognitive decline, and Alzheimer’s
disease: a critical review and evaluation of the literature. J Alzheimers
Dis 2010;21:673–90.
[39] Vandal M, Alata W, Tremblay C, Rioux-Perreault C, Salem N Jr,
Calon F, et al. Reduction in DHA transport to the brain of mice expressing human APOE4 compared to APOE2. J Neurochem 2014;
129:516–26.
[40] Hennebelle M, Plourde M, Chouinard-Watkins R, Castellano CA, Barberger-Gateau P, Cunnane SC. Ageing and apoE change DHA homeostasis: relevance to age-related cognitive decline. Proc Nutr Soc 2014;
73:80–6.
[41] Samieri C, Lorrain S, Buaud B, Vaysse C, Berr C, Peuchant E, et al.
Relationship between diet and plasma long-chain n-3 PUFAs in older
people: impact of apolipoprotein E genotype. J Lipid Res 2013;
54:2559–67.
[42] Collins FS, Varmus H. A new initiative on precision medicine. N Engl
J Med 2015;372:793–5.
[43] Yuraszeck TM, Neveu P, Rodriguez-Fernandez M, Robinson A,
Kosik KS, Doyle FJ 3rd. Vulnerabilities in the tau network and the
role of ultrasensitive points in tau pathophysiology. PLoS Comput
Biol 2010;6:e1000997.
[44] Zak DE, Gonye GE, Schwaber JS, Doyle FJ 3rd. Importance of input
perturbations and stochastic gene expression in the reverse engineering of genetic regulatory networks: insights from an identifiability
analysis of an in silico network. Genome Res 2003;13:2396–405.

REV 5.4.0 DTD  JALZ2175_proof  25 May 2016  12:48 pm  ce