American Journal of Infection Control 41 (2013) 1017-23

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

American Journal of Infection Control

American Journal of
Infection Control

journal homepage: www.ajicjournal.org

Major article

Immunizing health care workers against inﬂuenza: A glimpse into the challenges
with voluntary programs and considerations for mandatory policies
Susan Quach MSc a, Jennifer A. Pereira PhD a, Jeffrey C. Kwong MD, MSc a, b, c, d, e, Sherman Quan MSc a, e,
Lois Crowe BA f, Maryse Guay MD g, h, i, Julie A. Bettinger PhD, MPH j, *, and for the Public Health Agency of
Canada/Canadian Institutes of Health Research Inﬂuenza Research Network (PCIRN) Program Delivery
and Evaluation Theme Group
a

Surveillance and Epidemiology, Public Health Ontario, Toronto, Canada
Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
c
Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Toronto, Canada
d
Department of Family Medicine and Community Medicine, Toronto, Canada
e
University Health Network, Toronto, Canada
f
Bruyère Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada
g
Départment des sciences de la santé communautaire, Université de Sherbrooke, Longueuil, Canada
h
Institut national de santé publique du Québec, Longueuil, Canada
i
Direction de santé publique, Agence de la santé et des services sociaux de la Montérégie, Longueuil, Canada
j
Vaccine Evaluation Center, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
b

Key Words:
Vaccine coverage
Inﬂuenza vaccination
Health care personnel

Background: Vaccination of health care workers (HCWs) is an important patient safety initiative. It
prevents inﬂuenza infection among patients and reduces staff illness and absenteeism. Despite these
beneﬁts, HCW inﬂuenza immunization uptake is low. Therefore, strategies to achieve high immunization
coverage in HCWs, barriers to uptake, and perceptions of mandatory inﬂuenza immunization policies
were discussed in key informant interviews with inﬂuenza immunization program planners.
Methods: We conducted telephone interviews with 23 inﬂuenza immunization program planners from
21 organizations (7 acute care hospitals, 6 continuing care facilities, and 8 public health organizations)
across Canada. We used content analysis to identify themes from the interviews.
Results: Participants used a variety of promotional and educational activities, and many vaccine delivery
approaches, to support HCW immunization programs. Barriers to achieving high coverage in HCWs
included misconceptions about the safety and effectiveness of the inﬂuenza vaccine, negative personal
experiences associated with the vaccine, and antivaccine sentiments. Participants mentioned mandatory
inﬂuenza immunizations as a solution to low coverage. However, they identiﬁed challenges with this
approach such as obtaining support from stakeholders, enforcement, and limiting personal autonomy.
Conclusion: Participants believed immunization coverage in health care organizations will continue to be
suboptimal using existing program strategies. Although participants discussed mandatory immunization
as a way to improve uptake, potential obstacles will need to be addressed for this to be implemented
successfully.
Copyright Ó 2013 by the Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

* Address correspondence to Julie A. Bettinger, PhD, MPH, Associate Professor,
Vaccine Evaluation Center, University of British Columbia, 950 West 28th Avenue,
Room A-5, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada.
E-mail address: jbettinger@cfri.ca (J.A. Bettinger).
PCIRN Program Delivery and Evaluation Theme Group members: Stephanie
Brien, David Buckeridge, Jemila Hamid, Natasha Crowcroft, Shelley Deeks, Michael
Finkelstein, Julie Bettinger, Maryse Guay, Lois Crowe, Faron Kolbe, Jeff Kwong,
Allison McGeer, Jennifer Pereira, Susan Quach, Sherman Quan, Margaret Russell,
Beate Sander, Chris Sikora, and Anne-Luise Winter.

Supported by an operating grant from the Public Health Agency of Canada
and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (IRR- 96974); by a University of
Toronto Department of Family and Community Medicine Clinician Scientist Award
(to J.C.K.); by a Career Investigator Award from the Michael Smith Foundation for
Health Research (J.A.B.); by The Canadian Association for Immunization Research
and Evaluation, which provided networking assistance; and The Canadian Health
Inﬂuenza Immunization Network (CHIIN), which provided support in identifying
the survey sample.
Conﬂicts of interest: None to report.

0196-6553/$36.00 - Copyright Ó 2013 by the Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2013.05.016

1018

S. Quach et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 41 (2013) 1017-23

Vaccinating health care workers (HCWs) against inﬂuenza is the
most effective strategy to prevent spread in health care settings.1
Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization recommends HCW inﬂuenza immunization to protect them from infection and to prevent transmission to patients at high risk for
inﬂuenza and its complications,2 and inﬂuenza immunizations are
provided for free to HCWs. Despite the evidence supporting the
beneﬁts of inﬂuenza immunization, vaccine coverage in Canadian
health care organizations is low (40%-60%),3,4 and health care
organizations have identiﬁed this as a signiﬁcant occupational
health and safety issue.
To address this issue in the United States, policies and laws
making HCW inﬂuenza immunization mandatory have been
implemented. These measures have dramatically improved
immunization uptake (>90%).5-9 In Canada, mandatory immunization policies of any kind are rare; only 3 provinces (Ontario, New
Brunswick [NB], and Manitoba) have compulsory immunization
legislation for vaccine-preventable diseases at school entry with
exemptions allowed only for medical or religious reasons.10,11 In
contrast, all 50 US states have laws requiring immunization but
allow exemptions for medical, religious, or philosophical
reasons.12 Some Canadian health care organizations require proof
of HCW inﬂuenza immunization only during outbreaks. To date,
only 1 province (Ontario) has attempted to legislate mandatory
immunization for HCWs; in 2000, Ontario’s Ministry of Health and
Long-Term Care required inﬂuenza immunizations for paramedics. Rather than legislate mandatory immunization, British
Columbia’s (BC) Ministry of Health required HCWs to be immunized or wear a mask during the 2012/2013 inﬂuenza season as
a condition of service.13 The Ontario attempt at mandatory
immunization and the BC attempt at mandatory protection (ie,
immunization or masking) have been challenged as being violations of personal autonomy. Because of HCW opposition, the
mandate for Ontario paramedics was repealed, and implementation of the enforcement and disciplinary components of the BC
policy was delayed.14-16
We conducted semistructured interviews with HCW inﬂuenza
immunization planners from across Canada to understand their
strategies for program implementation. In this paper, we
describe themes associated with barriers to achieving high
immunization coverage and mandatory inﬂuenza immunization
policies.
METHODS
In-depth interviews were conducted in January 2012 to learn
about immunization program strategies and processes for collecting immunization data, including barriers and facilitating factors
for measuring and reporting inﬂuenza immunization rates.
Sampling and recruitment
The key informants selected for this study were identiﬁed from
a 2011 online survey of Canadian health care organizations.17
Individuals responsible for HCW inﬂuenza immunization at acute
care hospitals or continuing care organizations across Canada were
identiﬁed through multiple methods, including consultation with
provincial/regional public health authorities and regional infection
control networks, postings in infection control and occupational
health and safety bulletins, e-mail lists, Web site advertisements,
and cold calls to organizations. Sixty-six percent (n ¼ 478) of the
online survey respondents agreed to future contact for research.
From this group, we selected individuals from 30 organizations
to follow-up with in-depth interviews. The organizations were
selected based on the type of care provided (acute, long-term care,

both), number of HCWs employed, and province, with the aim of
having representation from a variety of organizations and provinces. Provinces and territories without HCW inﬂuenza immunization programs (Nunavut, Northwest Territories, Yukon) or with
incomplete responses to the immunization rate measurement
questions on the online survey (BC and Newfoundland) were
excluded. Ethics approval was obtained from the University of
Toronto’s Health Sciences Research Ethics Board. All participants
provided informed consent.
Data collection
The semistructured interview guide included questions about
inﬂuenza immunization programs, data collection processes and
systems, methods for measuring immunization coverage rates, and
policies and procedures to support immunization coverage
measurement and reporting. The questions were based on the study
objectives and the results of the online survey.17 Themes emerged
describing barriers to achieving high immunization coverage and
mandatory inﬂuenza immunizations. These topics were not
included in the interview guide and were entirely initiated by the
participants; no probing was done to facilitate discussion.
Most interviews lasted approximately 1 hour (range, 45-90
minutes). Each interview was conducted with a single participant
from each organization, with the exception of 2 interviews where
2 participants from the same organization were interviewed
simultaneously. Eighteen interviews were conducted in English and
3 in French. The English interview guide was translated into French
and reviewed for accuracy. We recorded all interviews with an
electronic recorder and transcribed the interviews verbatim
(interviews in French were translated after transcription).
Data analysis
We used content analysis to interpret the interview data. Two
researchers (S.Q. and J.A.P.) co-coded 25% of transcripts, documented key phrases and developed individual codes to create
a coding dictionary. Next, 3 researchers (S.Q., J.A.P, and J.A.B.)
reviewed and discussed the transcripts and revised the coding
dictionary to ensure codes were consistently deﬁned and applied to
the same concepts. QSR NVivo (version 9.0; Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia) was used to organize coded data; codes were categorized
and sorted to allow dominant themes to emerge. Key themes that
arose from the data were further examined by organization type.
RESULTS
In total, 23 participants representing 21 health care organizations (6 continuing care organizations, 7 acute care hospitals, and 8
regional public health organizations [Public health organizations
had both continuing care and acute care beds. These could
also represent regional health authorities or, in Quebec, Centres
de Sante et de Services Sociaux (CSSS) (Health and Social Services
Centers]) participated in the interviews. Of those, 15 participants
representing 13 health care organizations (3 continuing care
organizations, 6 acute care hospitals, and 4 public health organizations) described barriers to achieving high immunization
coverage and mandatory inﬂuenza immunization policies. The 13
organizations represented 7 provinces: Alberta (1), Saskatchewan
(1), Manitoba (1), Ontario (5), Quebec (1), NB (1), and Nova Scotia
(3). Participants had 2 to 10 years of experience with HCW inﬂuenza immunization programs (median, 5 years) and were the lead
organizer for their organization; this was similar for those who
did and did not discuss barriers and mandatory immunization.
The 15 participants included 6 occupational health and safety

S. Quach et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 41 (2013) 1017-23

nurses, 4 occupational health and safety managers, 3 infection
control nurses, 1 workplace health and safety advisor, and 1 director.
Most participants (n ¼ 9/15) worked in large health care organizations (500 employees).

Table 1
Strategies used to promote and deliver inﬂuenza vaccine

Strategies
On-site immunization clinic (routine hours)y
On-site immunization clinic (extended hours)y
Mobile cartsy
Peer to peer immunizations (allowing colleagues
to vaccinate each other)y
Reporting immunization rates to managers
Poster or pamphlets
Incentives (eg, food, stickers, prizes)y
Group educational sessions
Strategies to promote program progress (eg,
thermometer with percent vaccinated,
announcements)y
Role models/ﬂu champions to encourage
immunizationsy
Using a declination formy
Other (eg, e-mail reminders, Internet/Intranet
notices)y

Current strategies to support immunization programs
All participants used a variety of vaccine delivery methods and
strategies to support voluntary uptake of inﬂuenza immunizations
(Table 1) and numerous educational and promotional activities to
enhance their programs. These activities were designed to increase
knowledge about inﬂuenza vaccines, address common concerns
about vaccine safety and effectiveness, and raise awareness of the
program. More acute care hospitals used strategies to promote and
deliver inﬂuenza vaccine compared with other types of organizations.
Barriers to achieving high inﬂuenza immunization coverage in
HCWs
Despite promotional activities and accessible delivery methods,
participants expressed frustration about being unable to achieve
what they perceived as a high immunization uptake among their
HCWs. They identiﬁed several barriers to vaccine uptake.

1019

Subsample
n ¼ 13 (%)*

Total sample,
N [ 21 (%)

10
8
8
7

(77)
(62)
(62)
(54)

17
13
12
10

(81)
(67)
(57)
(48)

7
13
8
6
6

(54)
(100)
(62)
(46)
(46)

12
21
13
8
10

(57)
(100)
(62)
(38)
(48)

6 (46)

8 (38)

1 (8)
4 (31)

4 (19)
6 (29)

*Subsample is the number of organizations that discussed the themes on mandatory
immunizations and barriers to achieving high coverage.
More acute care hospitals utilized strategies to promote and deliver inﬂuenza
vaccine.

y

1. Antivaccination/vaccine-hesitant HCWs
Ten participants described the difﬁculties they had convincing
HCWs who expressed antivaccine sentiments to be immunized.
Moreover, participants stated that traditional strategies for
promoting the vaccine were insufﬁcient to reach antivaccine or
vaccine-hesitant HCWs because more time and effort were
required to address their concerns and change their perceptions of
inﬂuenza immunization. More participants from large acute care
hospitals discussed experiences dealing with highly vaccinehesitant groups in their facility compared with other types of
organizations. The types of HCWs (eg, laundry staff, nurses, paramedics, physicians) and department groups (eg, intensive care,
emergency department, pre-hospital care, laboratory) with these
opinions varied across organizations. Participants noted that individuals working closely together held similar attitudes about
inﬂuenza vaccines and described instances where HCWs with
strong antivaccine views may have inﬂuenced their peers’ decisions:
“I have whole departments that’ll refuse to [get vaccinated]. And
the lab people, I’m really having a hard time getting them
onboard because they have a couple of people that are sort of
anti-vaccine and have pulled up all sorts of stuff from the
Internet . . .”
“And then if we get anybody [HCW] that really doesn’t care for
the ﬂu vaccine and if they’re talking in front of people [HCWs]
who might be sitting on the fence one way or the other, I
personally feel that they can sway those individuals against
having the vaccine.”
One participant noted a shift in attitudes about professional
responsibility among younger nurses, observing resistance to
inﬂuenza immunization because they did not perceive it as part of
their professional obligation and they prioritized their own interests over their patients’ health.

“[Emergency staff] are the ﬁrst point of contact when people
come in or they get admitted through ambulance bay. So they’ve
seen GBS cases, and the patients have verbalized they felt it was
related to the ﬂu shot. What I try to explain with the Emerg staff
is that you see them at point of contact when they believe that’s
what their illness or symptoms are related to. You don’t see the
end case where they actually tell you what caused it. . . . Maybe
it’s department speciﬁc, like I said, ER. I ﬁnd it difﬁcult [to
convince them to get vaccinated]. ICU can be as well because
they actually care for the GBS patients. We had a patient in ICU
that received the H1N1 vaccine and at ﬁrst, for the ﬁrst couple of
weeks that they were here, it was believed that the inﬂuenza
vaccine could have caused that. And so that caused a lot of fear
and trepidation in the staff, especially when I came around with
my cart. . . .”
Such episodes promoted fear and concerns about the vaccine in
vaccine-hesitant HCWs and provided additional evidence to
support antivaccine sentiments.
3. Misconceptions of inﬂuenza immunizations
Several common misconceptions about inﬂuenza immunizations were used to justify not being immunized:
 Inﬂuenza vaccine is ineffective at preventing inﬂuenza
“There’s a portion of people who are against getting the vaccine
and those people you aren’t going to change their minds
because they don’t believe the vaccine works.”
 Inﬂuenza vaccine is unnecessary for healthy individuals

2. Negative personal experiences perceived to be associated with
inﬂuenza immunizations

“A lot of people don’t get the ﬂu shot, they’ll say, ‘I’m healthy,’ ‘I
don’t need it.’ So that’s their rationale for not getting the ﬂu shot.
. . . what people get from the advertisements is you really only
need it if you’re sick or in the nursing home or you have a lot of
health issues.”

In some acute care hospitals, immunization uptake was inﬂuenced by negative events experienced by HCWs as a result of their
occupation.

 Vaccine should not be given to pregnant women or those with
contraindication concerns (eg, egg allergies) because it is not
safe

1020

S. Quach et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 41 (2013) 1017-23

“There were a couple of women who were pregnant and their
friends told them never to get the ﬂu shot ‘cause, you know,
‘your baby will die,’ things like that, you know.”
 Vaccine is not safe because it can cause neurological disorders
“A lot of people last year were really scared of GBS. So they felt
that the ingredients or preservatives were causing the neurological disorder and that actually some people went as far as
saying that I was injecting them with diseases.”
Inﬂuenza vaccine causes inﬂuenza
“And there’s people that hear gossip that somebody got sick
because they had the ﬂu needle. And all you can do is continue
to educate the staff and put posters up and explain to them that
no, you cannot get sick from getting a ﬂu needle. It doesn’t give
you the ﬂu. . . .”
4. Inﬂuence of H1N1 pandemic on subsequent immunization
programs
Seven participants representing 5 organizations mentioned that
immunization rates were high during the 2009 A/H1N1 pandemic
but had dropped signiﬁcantly in subsequent years. Increased fear
about disease severity and vaccine rationing were mentioned as
reasons to explain the high pandemic vaccine coverage rates.
Because vaccine was initially provided only to speciﬁc groups of
HCWs, this stimulated demand and motivated HCWs to be immunized. Three participants attributed low coverage in the following
season to negative media coverage and conﬂicting messages from
health ofﬁcials during the pandemic and confusion about ingredients of the 2010-2011 seasonal vaccine.
“And something happened in 2010, with regard to the number
of staff that wanted to accept the [seasonal] vaccine. . . . We’ve
seen a big drop since they put the H1N1 in there. Also we tried to
do a lot of education this year for staff around the fact that the
vaccine always has three strains and that the H1N1 is just one of
those strains. But it doesn’t seem to be catching on.”
“And then with H1N1, people were kind of scared so more
people got it [the vaccine] that year. So I got a better turnout. I
think it was from fear. . . .”
“I was an immunizer here and it was very upsetting because one
day they [health ofﬁcials] said, ‘Oh, you have to separate the
shots two weeks apart.’ Then a little while later, they said, ‘No,
you don’t separate the shots. You can give one in each arm.’ Then
came, ‘No, you can give both in the same arm.’ And that was only
one example of misinformation that went on with H1N1. We
lost a lot of credibility there.”
“Our rates were quite high until [after the pandemic]dthey
were the highest in 2009. The following year they went back
down probably ten to twenty percent. . . . I guess all the negative
media coverage caused a lot of doubt in people’s minds. So now
it feels like we’re kind of starting over in the education process.”

Mandatory inﬂuenza immunization policies
All participants mentioned that their organization had policies
or procedures recommending inﬂuenza vaccinations for HCWs and
provided this to employees free of charge; most made it a requirement during inﬂuenza outbreaks. However, none of the organizations had a mandatory policy requiring seasonal inﬂuenza
vaccination for HCWs outside of an outbreak scenario. Three

organizations required inﬂuenza immunization for external groups
(eg, students, contractors).
Participants expressed frustration that a voluntary program was
inadequate for obtaining high coverage. Several stated that
a mandatory program was the only solution for reaching and
sustaining high coverage in HCWs, although they recognized
potential concerns and challenges. Nine participants shared their
thoughts about the positive attributes and anticipated challenges of
a mandatory policy.

Reasons to support a mandatory inﬂuenza immunization policy
Participants believed that, in addition to existing program
strategies, a mandatory policy was needed to improve coverage.
Without a mandatory program, organizations would continue to
struggle with inﬂuenza immunization.
“Until it’s mandatory, organizations ﬂounder and we do the best
we can with intimidation and prizes. It’s like measles, mumps,
rubella. I can run you off the stats for measles, mumps, rubella
and I will tell you every employee in this hospital is immunized
and they’ve had [immunization] done. For hepatitis B, everybody who has a potential to bedhave contact with bloodd
they’re immunized against hep B, because it’s mandated. . . .
Until they do that for inﬂuenza immunization, organizations are
just going to ﬂounder. With measles, mumps, rubella, it’s
mandatory that you’re immunized.”
Others cited how mandatory policies in the United States have
improved coverage. Mandating the vaccine would reinforce HCWs’
professional responsibilities to protect their patients while also
increasing conﬁdence and support for the vaccine.
“If the inﬂuenza vaccination was mandated, I think the staff
would see it not so much as their right to choose [but] as
a responsibility part of it as being a health care worker, being
willing to get the vaccine. I don’t like to see mandates, but I don’t
see any other option with the current negative publicity
regarding immunizations. . . . They would believe that the
vaccine is safe if it was mandatory. . . .”
A few participants mentioned that having a mandatory policy
would make their jobs easier.

Challenges associated with a mandatory policy
Although participants recognized positive aspects of mandatory
policies, many also had concerns about implementation challenges.
1. Loss of personal autonomy
Participants were concerned that a mandatory policy would
curtail personal autonomy by eliminating an individual’s right to
choose whether to be immunized. This concern was consistent
across different types of organizations. Participants suspected this
could increase resistance to immunization and discontent among
HCWs. Mandatory immunizations would be a violation of human
rights, as demonstrated by the repeal of the Ontario mandatory
legislation for paramedics. A few mentioned that vaccination was
a personal choice that required informed consent. Although some
participants mentioned that they would support a mandatory
policy as it related to their occupational role, they had difﬁculties
accepting the limits on personal autonomy that would be imposed
by such a policy and mentioned it would be uncomfortable to
enforce.

S. Quach et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 41 (2013) 1017-23

“We talked about trying to make it [inﬂuenza immunization]
mandatory here this year. This was brought on by a new
administrator. But our understanding is that that’s against
human rights or something. So we didn’t do that [this year].”
“I have a real ethical problem with that [mandatory immunizations]. The nurse in me says it should be mandatory. But
then the citizen in me says what happened to free choice?
It’s a conﬂict. And why should it be mandatory for health
care workers and not mandatory for the person who works
in my bank who can cough on me and infect me or other
people?”
“We [senior management] thought that some of them [HCWs]
would really get their backs up. People don’t like to be told what
to do and some who might actually take it [the vaccine]
wouldn’t take it just because we were trying to force them into
it. . . . I don’t believe you can force somebody to do something
just because they’re a health care worker. Is it best practice?
Sure. Should people do it? Sure. But everybody has their own
choice. . . .”
2. Support from all external and internal stakeholders
Many participants mentioned that they needed support and
direction from internal and external stakeholders to implement
and enforce a mandatory policy. Internal stakeholders included
HCWs and senior management. External stakeholders included
governments, academic institutions, union groups, the general
public, and health care professional bodies. Obtaining support from
internal and external stakeholders was more commonly mentioned
by participants representing acute care hospitals than continuing
care organizations. For example, 2 of the organizations that
required students to be immunized encountered resistance from
academic institutions and parents, making it challenging to
enforce.
“We get pushback [about requiring inﬂuenza immunization]
from the academic institutions ‘cause they say you don’t
mandate it for your own staff.”
“Our requirement for students coming into the workplace is
they must have the ﬂu shot. Like, they cannot start their
placement here if they do not have it. And I’ve had mothers call
me and say that I’m harassing their child. . . . I’m not harassing
your child. Your child just doesn’t have to come here for
a placement; it’s as simple as that.”
“I think one of the things with inﬂuenza immunization is we all
have looked towards the government and the health units and
the ministries to make it mandatory.”
3. Implementation and enforcement
A few participants had concerns about who would enforce
a mandatory policy and how it would be enforced since substantial
resources would be required to support implementation.
“We were talking about it being mandatory for all staff. And
we’re like, ‘Well, the physicians work very closely with the
residents, so who’s going to make sure they have ﬂu shots?’ And
I’m like, ‘I’m not doing that.’ Not that I wouldn’t. . . . But I just
assume that they take it. But I’m not going to be polling them
[physicians] and trying to make them take them if they don’t
want to.”
“Yeah, it’s hard to actually be the one to go on the frontlines and
[enforce it]. And then you get into all of the [documentation].

1021

Well, you know, if you’re not going to take it, do you need
a doctor’s note?”
4. Union groups
Union support was described as being important by participants
in all types of organizations. Participants provided examples from
the Ontario paramedics’ union experience. Because of this experience, some participants perceived that a mandatory approach
would never work in Canada.
“I know this will never happen, but, I think if there’s something
that could come from the unions that represent our staff, the
nurses union and the union that represents housekeeping and
the kitchen, just saying, ‘we’re also interested in the health of
our union members’. . . . They should support this initiative, too.
But I don’t think that will ever happen”
“It’s basically a human rights and arbitration decision. So that’s
mainly union-driven that cause a problem. ‘Cause I know they
tried to mandate the ambulance workers in Ontario, but they
obviously won the grievance that they could still decline and
they wouldn’t lose their jobs.”
“They (senior management) have talked about it [mandatory
immunizations], but nothing’s in the works yet ‘cause it’s such
a grey area, especially where everybody’s unionized.”

DISCUSSION
We found that voluntary inﬂuenza immunization programs
struggle to achieve high coverage among HCWs despite myriad
educational and promotional activities. Participants expressed
frustration with the current state and thought their efforts were
inadequate. Although mandatory inﬂuenza immunization is
a potential solution, many participants were concerned about
implementation and acceptability.
Low HCW inﬂuenza immunization coverage has been an
ongoing challenge for most health care organizations, yet not all
evidence-based strategies (eg, declination forms, reporting of rates,
immunization champions, peer immunizers) are universally
employed. For example, although declination forms are associated
with improving coverage, only 32% of Canadian health care organizations use them.17 Some study participants report coverage rates
to staff and public health, but none report rates to the public
because this is not a requirement and may generate negative
repercussions.
Despite extensive education about the vaccine, common
misconceptions persist. Similar to other studies, participants
mentioned that HCWs perceived the vaccine to be ineffective,
unsafe, and unnecessary for healthy individuals.18 HCW groups and
departments often exhibit similar immunization behaviors,
consistent with the normative belief concept in the Theory of
Planned Behavior, which suggests that perceived social pressure
from signiﬁcant others can inﬂuence one’s behavior.19 Other studies
have also demonstrated that HCWs take into consideration peer
opinions about vaccinations.20,21 To overcome this, immunization
champions can be used to better promote and expand the
campaign to the frontlines by inﬂuencing attitudes about inﬂuenza
immunizations and fostering a patient safety culture. In BC and
Nova Scotia, immunization champions encourage fellow HCWs to
accept inﬂuenza vaccination, and they also help administer
vaccines.22,23 Addressing common misconceptions and developing
a culture that fosters social acceptance of inﬂuenza immunization
can increase coverage.

1022

S. Quach et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 41 (2013) 1017-23

Although not all evidence-based strategies are used, participants thought that a saturation point has been reached for voluntary strategies, and several mentioned mandatory inﬂuenza
immunization policies as a potential solution. Participants elucidated factors necessary to implement mandatory policies in
Canada.
Mandatory policies require support and guidance from multiple
stakeholders, including senior management. Strong commitment of
senior leadership was a key factor identiﬁed by US health care organizations with successful mandatory policies.5,7 Other factors that
support mandatory policies include early delivery of information and
education to staff, extensive communication, reliable and extensive
vaccine distribution plan including multiple delivery methods, ability
to track employees to ensure compliance, and accountability from
frontline managers.5,7 Whereas some of these are already routine,
additional time and resources may be required to expand their scope
when implementing a mandatory policy.
Obtaining support from unions was also mentioned as
a prerequisite to mandatory policies in Canada. Approximately 61%
of HCWs are unionized, with nurses having the highest percentage
of unionization at 79%.24 In contrast, only 13% of HCWs in the
United States are unionized.25 Thus, because the majority of
Canadian HCWs are represented by unions, working with union
leadership to develop mandatory policies is critical. Without their
support, grievances can compromise policy implementation, as
mentioned by several participants. For example, condition of
service policies requiring HCWs to either be immunized or wear
a mask throughout inﬂuenza season were introduced in both BC
and in 1 of the health authorities in NB in 2012 (M. Babineau,
personal communication; April 29, 2013). Those who did not follow
the policy would face disciplinary procedures. The BC Nurses’
Union launched a grievance over the policy, stating vaccination
should remain a voluntary choice and that nurses should retain the
right to exercise their professional judgement.26 In contrast, the
nurses’ union in NB supported the policy based on improved
patient care and safety (M. Quinn, personal communication; April
29, 2013). Although conditions of the 2 policies were fairly similar,
successful implementation depended on support from unions and
government stakeholders. Ideally, health care leaders should
involve union leaders and other important stakeholders early in the
policy development stages and in the collective bargaining agreement to ensure the process stays centered on balancing patient
safety needs with workers’ rights.
Participants had concerns about the limits that mandatory
policies would place on personal autonomy and the tension
between individuals’ right to choose versus the greater societal
good. This ideology can be traced to the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedom, which broadly describes the rights of individuals as
part of the Constitution of Canada.27 In the interviews, half of the
respondents who mentioned this tension were from Ontario where
the Charter of Rights and Freedom was applied to the 2002 paramedic’s case. In that case, the labor union argued that the
requirement was a violation of individual rights and freedoms.
However, in a 2009 review of the legislation and rulings
surrounding this issue, Rodal et al found that, in some circumstances, condition of service requirements for HCW inﬂuenza
immunization could be justiﬁable under the Charter.28 Proponents
for mandating inﬂuenza immunizations argue that HCWs who care
for patients accept an ethical obligation governed by the Hippocratic Oath: ﬁrst, do no harm.29 This is consistent with National
Advisory Committee on Immunization’s argument that “HCWs who
have direct patient contact should consider it their responsibility to
provide the highest standard of care, which includes annual inﬂuenza vaccination. In the absence of contraindications, refusal of
HCWs who have direct patient contact to be immunized against

inﬂuenza implies failure in their duty of care to patients.” Similarly,
the Canadian Nurses Association considers mandatory immunization policies by employers to be in agreement with the Code of
Ethics for Registered Nurses in Canada and the obligation to act in
the public interest.30 The Association of Medical Microbiology and
Infectious Disease Canada issued a recent position paper stating
that immunization as a condition of employment was ethically
justiﬁed because HCWs have speciﬁc obligations to do no harm and
to take all reasonable action to protect patients, over HCWs’
personal preferences.31 Offering an alternative to vaccination such
as wearing a mask or being reassigned to another work setting
where patient contact is limited may provide the balance needed to
protect both personal autonomy and professional obligations.
Strengths and limitations
Participation was voluntary, and, at the start of each interview,
privacy was assured; therefore, we are conﬁdent that individuals
thought they could be open and honest in their responses. The
themes explored in this study were not preidentiﬁed and emerged
at the data analysis stage, after the interviews had been completed.
Therefore, in-depth probing of these topics did not occur. The
results reﬂect the spontaneous thoughts of the participants rather
than any guidance from the interviewer. Our study did not include
representation from all the provinces and territories. Finally, the
participants reﬂect a small sample of individuals who manage
immunization programs; therefore, these results cannot be generalized to all inﬂuenza immunization program planners in Canada.
CONCLUSION
In summary, this study provides a glimpse into the challenges of
implementing voluntary inﬂuenza immunization programs in health
care settings. Based on the interviews, the majority of participants
was frustrated at the current status and perceived that existing
promotional and educational activities had minimal impact on
coverage. Similarly, many Canadian health care organizations and
governments have also realized this, leading to increased advocacy
for mandatory approaches or condition of service policies.14,29,32
Whereas many recognized the potential beneﬁts of mandatory
inﬂuenza immunization policies on coverage, more work is needed
to understand how to best implement such a strategy in the current
Canadian environment. Moving forward, health care and public
health leaders must engage HCWs and other stakeholders to determine how to balance personal autonomy against the need to
immunize HCWs as part of an effective inﬂuenza prevention strategy.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank the study participants for their involvement.
References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Options for controlling inﬂuenza.
November 30, 2012. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/professionals/
acip/options.htm. Accessed April 14, 2013.
2. National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI). Recommendations on
the use of live, attenuated inﬂuenza vaccine (FluMist). Supplemental statement
on seasonal inﬂuenza vaccine for 2011-2012. 37 ed. Ottawa [Canada]: Public
Health Agency of Canada; 2011. p. 1-77.
3. Toronto Public Health. Inﬂuenza immunization rates of healthcare workers in
Toronto healthcare facilities (2011). Toronto: City of Toronto; 2011.
4. Wellington-Dufferin-Guelph Public Health Unit. Inﬂuenza immunization rates
for healthcare workers in long-term care homes, retirement homes, and
hospitals, in Wellinton-Dufferin-Guelph for the 2010-2011 season. March 9,
2011. Available from: http://www.wdgpublichealth.ca/sites/default/ﬁles/
wdgphﬁles/BH_01_03_02_0311%20inﬂuenza%20immunization%20rates(2).pdf.
Accessed April 14, 2013.

S. Quach et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 41 (2013) 1017-23
5. Robert M, Rakita MD, Beverly A, Hagar BC, Patricia Crome MN, Joyce K, et al.
Mandatory inﬂuenza vaccination of healthcare workers: a 5-year study. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010;31:881-8.
6. Poland GA, Tosh P, Jacobson RM. Requiring inﬂuenza vaccination for health
care workers: seven truths we must accept. Vaccine 2005;23:2251-5.
7. Huynh S, Poduska P, Mallozzi T, Culler F. Mandatory inﬂuenza vaccination of
health care workers: a ﬁrst-year success implementation by a community
health care system. Am J Infect Control 2012;40:771-3.
8. Miller BL, Ahmed F, Lindley MC, Wortley PM. Increases in vaccination coverage
of healthcare personnel following institutional requirements for inﬂuenza
vaccination: a national survey of US hospitals. Vaccine 2011;29:9398-403.
9. Babcock HM, Gemeinhart N, Jones M, Dunagan WC, Woeltje KF. Mandatory
inﬂuenza vaccination of health care workers: translating policy to practice. Clin
Infect Dis 2010;50:459-64.
10. Walkinshaw E. Mandatory vaccinations: the Canadian picture. Can Med Assoc J
2011;183:E1165-6.
11. Mah CL, Guttman A, McGeer A, Krahn M, Deber RB. Compulsory school-entry
vaccination laws and exemptions: who is opting out in Ontario and why
does it matter? Health Policy 2010;5:37-46.
12. Swendiman KS. Mandatory vaccinations: precedent and current laws. Washington [DC]: Congressional Research Service; 2011. p. 1-9. Available from:
http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RS21414.pdf. Accessed April 13, 2013.
13. BC Centre for Disease Control. Immunize BC: Inﬂuenza control policy–wearing
masks. Available from: http://immunizebc.ca/healthcare-professionals/inﬂuenzacontrol-policy-wearing-masks. Accessed April 14, 2013.
14. British Columbia Ministry of Health. Clariﬁcation on the health care worker ﬂu
policy. December 4, 2012. Available from: http://www2.news.gov.bc.ca/news_
releases_2009-2013/2012HLTH0143-001960.htm. Accessed April 14, 2013.
15. Rod Mickleburgh. Flu shot policy for health-care workers sparks backlash. The
Globe and Mail. 2013 Nov 21;Sect Health. Available from: http://www
.theglobeandmail.com/news/british-columbia/ﬂu-shot-policy-for-health-careworkers-sparks-backlash/article5547136/. Accessed April 13, 2013.
16. CUPE Ontario. Controversial mandatory ﬂu shot scrapped, paramedics elated
over health ministry policy reversal. October 3, 2002. Available from: http://
archive.ontario.cupe.ca/news/nr021003-1.html. Accessed April 14, 2013.
17. Quach S, Pereira JA, Hamid JS, Crowe L, Heidebrecht CL, Kwong JC, et al.
Measuring inﬂuenza immunization coverage among health care workers in
acute care hospitals and continuing care organizations in Canada. Am J Infect
Control 2013;41:340-4.
18. Steiner MP, Vermeulen LCRMS, Mullahy JP, Hayney MSSP. Factors inﬂuencing
decisions regarding inﬂuenza vaccination and treatment: a survey of healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:625-7.

1023

19. Ajzen I. The theory of planned behavior. Organ Behav Hum Dec 1991;50:179-211.
20. Baron G, De Wals P, Milord F. Vaccination practices of Quebec family physicians: inﬂuenza vaccination status and professional practices for inﬂuenza
vaccination. Can Fam Physician 2001;47:2261-6.
21. Gaston Godin P, Lydi-Anne Vézina-Im MS, Herminé Naccache MS. Determinants of inﬂuenza vaccination among healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2010;31:689-93.
22. Slaunwhite JM, Smith SM, Fleming MT, Strang R, Lockhart C. Increasing
vaccination rates among health care workers using unit “champions” as
a motivator. Can J Infect Control 2009;24:159-64.
23. Vancouver Island Health Authority. Inﬂuenza Protection Policy. November 15,
2012. Available from: http://www.viha.ca/NR/rdonlyres/9898A5FA-6994-4A53AED2-6144A066D70C/0/924_viha_inﬂuenza_protection_policy.pdf.
Accessed
April 25, 2013.
24. Uppal S. Unionization 2011. Ottawa [Canada]: Statistics Canada; 2011. p. 8.
Available from: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/75-001-x/2011004/article/11579eng.pdf. Accessed April 12, 2013.
25. Bureau of Labor Statistics. US Department of Labor. Union Members-2012.
January 23, 2013. Available from: http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/
union2.pdf. Accessed April 25, 2013.
26. BC Nurses' Union. Inﬂuenza policy enforcement provisions suspended.
December 5, 2012. Available from: https://www.bcnu.org/News/news.aspx?
page¼Bulletins_December%205_1,%202012. Accessed April 14, 2013.
27. Justice Laws Website, Government of Canada. Constitution act, 1982 c. 11
schedule B. Part 1: Canada charter of rights and freedoms. Available from: http://
laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/Const/page-15.html#h-44. Accessed January 30, 2013.
28. Rodal RN, Wilson K. Inﬂuenza vaccination for health care workers: towards
a workable and effective standard. Health Law J 2009;17:297-337.
29. Flegel K. Health care workers must protect patients from inﬂuenza by taking
the annual vaccine. Can Med Assoc J 2012;184:1873.
30. Canadian Nurses Association. Position statement: Inﬂuenza immunization of
Registered Nurses. Available from: http://www2.cna-aiic.ca/cna/documents/
pdf/publications/PS_Inﬂuenza_Immunization_for_RNs_e.pdf. Accessed April
14, 2013.
31. Bryce E, Embree J, Evans G, Johnston L, Katz K, McGeer A, et al. 2012 Mandatory
inﬂuenza immunization of healthcare workers (AMMI Canada Position Paper).
Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol 2012;24:12.
32. Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee (PIDAC). Best practices
for infection prevention and control programs in Ontario: in all health care settings.
3rd ed. Ontario: Public Health Ontario; 2012. p. 30-2. Available from: http://www
.healthunit.biz/WhatNowLTCH/BP%20for%20Infection%20PRevention%20&%20
Control%20Programs%20May%202012.pdf. Accessed April 14, 2013.

