Annals of Global Health

VOL. 81, NO. 4, 2015

ª 2015 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

ISSN 2214-9996
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aogh.2015.07.002

REVIEW ARTICLE

Review of Occupational Health and Safety Organization
in Expanding Economies: The Case of Southern Africa
Dingani Moyo, MBChB, MFOM, MOHS, MAppMgnt (Health),
Muzimkhulu Zungu, MBChB, DOMH, FCPHM, MMed (Community Health),
Spoponki Kgalamono, BCur, MBChB, DOH, FCPHM (Occ Med), MMed (Comm Health), DPH,
Chimba D. Mwila, MBChB (UNZA), Msc OM (London)
Harare, Zimbabwe; Braamfotein, South Africa; Pretoria, South Africa; Johannesburg, South Africa; and Kitwe,
Zambia

Abstract
B A C K G R O U N D Globally, access to occupational health and safety (OHS) by workers has remained at
very low levels. The organization and implementation of OHS in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Zambia, and
Botswana has remained at suboptimal levels. Inadequacy of human resource capital, training, and education
in the ﬁeld of OHS has had a major negative impact on the improvement of worker access to such services in
expanding economies. South Africa, Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Botswana have expanding economies with
active mining and agricultural activities that pose health and safety risks to the working population.
M E T H O D S A literature review and country systems inquiry on the organization of OHS services in the
4 countries was carried out. Because of the infancy and underdevelopment of OHS in southern Africa,
literature on the status of this topic is limited.
R E S U L T S In the 4 countries under review, OHS services are a function shared either wholly or partially

by 3 ministries, namely Health, Labor, and Mining. Other ministries, such as Environment and Agriculture,
carry small fragments of OHS function. The 4 countries are at different stages of OHS legislative
frameworks that guide the practice of health and safety in the workplace. Inadequacies in human
resource capital and expertise in occupational health and safety are noted major constraints in the
implementation and compliance to health and safety initiatives in the work place. South Africa has a
more mature system than Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Botswana. Lack of specialized training in occupational
health services, such as occupational medicine specialization for physicians, has been a major drawback
in Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Botswana.
D I S C U S S I O N The full adoption and success of OHS systems in Southern Africa remains constrained.
Training and education in OHS, especially in occupational medicine, will enhance the development and
maturation of occupational health in southern Africa. Capacitating primary health services with basic occupational health knowledge would be invaluable in bridging the current skills deﬁcit. Introducing short courses
and foundational tracks in occupational medicine for general medical practitioners would be invaluable
K E Y W O R D S occupational health and safety, southern Africa, worker’s health, occupational health
access, health systems, workplace health

© 2015 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

From the Baines Occupational and Travel Medicine Centre, Harare, Zimbabwe (DM); National Institute for Occupational Health, of the National
Health Laboratory Service, Braamfontein, South Africa (MZ, SK); School of Health Systems and Public Health, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South
Africa (MZ); School of Public Health, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa (SK); Onsite Occupational Health Consultancy, Kitwe,
Zambia (CDM). Address correspondence to D.M. (moyod@iwayafrica.co.zw).

496

Moyo et al.
Occupational Health and Safety in Southern Africa

INTRODUCTION

Access to health and safety in the workplace has had
an inexplicably challenging gestation and a protracted and complicated delivery phase globally. Its
development has not paralleled or matched the
industrialization impetus in both developed and
expanding economies. This is evidenced by the
alarming statistics showing that more than 2 million
work-related deaths and about 300 million nonfatal
occupational accidents occur annually, resulting in
global economic costs contributing to 4% of the
global gross domestic product (GDP).1 Because
workers represent half of the world’s population
and are the major contributors to economic and
social development, this magnitude of occupational
accidents and fatalities calls for an urgent redress of
the situation.2 Less than 15% of the global workforce, primarily in big enterprises in developed
countries, has access to occupational health and
safety (OHS).3 It still remains a big challenge in
expanding economies. The imperative fundamentals
to the genesis of wider coverage and improvement
of OHS rests on the commitment of member states
both individually and collectively. The majority of
expanding economies in Africa face an enormous
challenge of improving coverage and access to
OHS services.
The objective of this study was to review the
organization of occupational health in expanding
economies in southern Africa, namely, Zimbabwe,
South Africa, Botswana, and Zambia. However, little published literature exists on this subject, particularly in Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Botswana.
DEMOGRAPHICS

The southern African countries vary widely in terms
of their population sizes, economies, and the size of
labor force. South Africa is an upper middle-income
country located at the tip of Southern Africa4 with a
total population of 54 million5 and a GDP of
US$350.6 billion.6 The country has a labor force
of 20,228,000, of which 4,909,000 are unemployed
and 2,448,000 are employed in the informal sector
(nonagriculture).7 Zimbabwe is a low-income country with a GDP that stood at $13.19 billion in
2013.8 According to the 2012 Zimbabwe National
Population Census, the country’s population was
13,061,239,9 and in 2013 it was estimated at
14,150,000.8,10 In 2012, Zimbabwe had a total
labor force of about 5 million with only 30% of
the economically active labor force being in paid

Annals of Global Health, VOL. 81, NO. 4, 2015
J u l y eA u g u s t 2 0 1 5 : 4 9 5 – 5 0 2

employment. The unemployment rate was 11%.11
This unemployment rate excluded people who
were in informal employment. Botswana, like South
Africa, is an upper middle-income country with a
population of about 2 million and a GDP of
$14.78 billion.12 Botswana’s unemployment rate
stood at 20% in 2014, whereas the formal sector
accounted for 389,665 workers.13 Zambia is a lower
middle-income country with a population of 14.54
million and a GDP of $26.82 billion.14
ORGANIZATION OF OHS SERVICES

Globally, OHS is generally a new discipline that is
still in its infancy stage, as reﬂected by the accident
and occupational diseases statistics and the low
global access to it. Despite the huge negative effect
on the lives of people, OHS has not received significant focus and support even when compared with
the substantial global support and attention given
to HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis. OHS has
remained an island whose existence has always
been recognized but with no concerted efforts
toward support. Southern Africa is no exception
to this, as evidenced by the signiﬁcant gaps in
human resource capital, training, and education
and programmatic approaches in the workplace.
Occupational health was supervised by Ministries
of Labor in about 40% of the European Region
Member States, and in about 60% by Ministries
of Health.15 In southern Africa, the practice of
occupational health has found itself multitentacled
and waddling between the Ministries of Health
and the Ministries of Labor, although in some cases
the Ministry of Labor has assumed responsibility.
Despite the noted poor coverage of OHS, the 4
southern African countries have demonstrated a certain level of commitment to OHS, as shown by
their ratiﬁcations of the International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions that have to do with
health and safety. Of the 4 countries reviewed
here, Zambia has the highest number of ratiﬁcations
of ILO technical conventions with 36, followed by
South Africa with 17, Zimbabwe with 15, and lastly
Botswana with 6.16 However, these endorsements
still fall far below the scheduled 177 technical
conventions.
OHS Legislation and Organization in Zimbabwe. In
Zimbabwe, the main custodian of OHS is the Ministry of Labor through the Division of Occupational
Health and Safety of the National Social Security
Authority of Zimbabwe (NSSA).17 NSSA administers 2 schemes, namely the Pensions and Other

Annals of Global Health, VOL. 81, NO. 4, 2015
J u l y eA u g u s t 2 0 1 5 : 4 9 5 – 5 0 2

Beneﬁts scheme and Accident Prevention and
Workers’ Compensation scheme. The Accident and
Prevention and Workers’ Compensation scheme is
administered through statutory instrument 68 of
1990. The Accident and Prevention and Workers’
Compensation scheme’s mandate is to create
awareness and promote health and safety in the
workplace, provide rehabilitation services, enforce
health and safety legislation, and provide ﬁnancial
beneﬁts to families of workers who have been
injured or killed or who have acquired occupational
diseases.17 The scheme requires all workplace accidents to be reported within 14 days regardless of
whether the worker has completed treatment. In
cases of serious accidents and fatalities, employers
are required to report to the nearest NSSA ofﬁce
and the police. The scheme meets all costs related to
workplace injuries, such as transport, drugs, hospital
fees, and artiﬁcial appliances (e.g., dentures, spectacles, hearing aids, artiﬁcial limbs, crutches and
other apparatus used by people who are physically
disabled.).17
The scheme is well organized and focuses on the
welfare of the employee and his or her family in the
event of an incapacitating or fatal accident or occupational disease. Unfortunately, the workforce covered by this scheme is very small, including only
30% of the national labor force in paid employment.11 The major challenge for the nation is to
develop strategies targeted at those workers not currently covered by the scheme, including the informal sector, civil service, and domestic workers. A
multitude of health and safety hazards also exist in
the excluded categories.
The second scheme administered by NSSA is
the Employees’ Pension Scheme. Employees who
suffer permanent disablements from injuries of
magnitudes of at least 30% are entitled to compensation that is paid as a pension.11 Permanent disablements below the 30% cutoff receive a lump
sum one-off payment commensurate with the
severity of their permanent disablements.
The Ministry of Health and Childcare plays the
role of diagnosing and managing workplace-related
occupational conditions. This is accomplished
through the normal health delivery system. The
Radiation Protection Authority and Environmental
Management agencies are charged with speciﬁc
functions of OHS.
Legislation. Zimbabwe has a foundational OHS
legislative framework that provides for the protection of workers’ health and safety. Like many other
African countries, one of the challenges is the lack

Moyo et al.
Occupational Health and Safety in Southern Africa

of a harmonized and comprehensive legal instrument that covers most workplaces. As previously
alluded to, the informal sector, domestic workers,
and the civil service are not covered by the current
OHS legislation.11 Highlights on the main OHS
pieces of legislation are as discussed here. The
foundational pieces of legislation governing OHS in
Zimbabwe include some of the following.
Statutory Instrument 68 of 1990: Act 12/
89.18 Among many other issues, this instrument

spells out the right to compensation for workers
involved in accidents arising from and during the
course of employment. It further details the exclusions from compensation for willful misconduct or
death occurring more than 12 months after the accident unless such death is proven to directly emanate
from the injury. The instrument further deﬁnes serious accidents as those resulting in permanent disablement of more than 30%. This instrument also
lists the scheduled occupational diseases arising
from various workplace exposures. Roles of employers and employees in OHS at the workplace are
detailed by the instrument in greater depth. Under
this act, compensation of victims is the responsibility of NSSA. This statutory instrument is quite
comprehensive in presenting a platform for management of OHS issues at the workplace. Lack of speciﬁc supporting occupational health standards and
ﬁtness for duty standards especially for safety sensitive/critical work presents a challenge in the optimization of OHS.
Pneumoconiosis Act: Chapter 15.08. of 1971 revised
1996.19 The Pneumoconiosis Act speciﬁcally

addresses, among other pertinent issues, the establishment of a medical bureau that oversees the surveillance of exposed workers in dusty occupations by
way of preplacement, periodic, and exit medical
examinations at speciﬁed times. It prescribes the
exclusions of employment in dusty environments.
Because Zimbabwe is endowed with various minerals and hard rock mining constitutes the greatest
activity, this is a very good proactive system that
offers comprehensive surveillance for workers
exposed to dust. There is, however, lack of similar
pieces of legislation that relate to other speciﬁc hazards such as noise, vibration, light, and ergonomic
risks. This has led to the so-called pneumoconiosis medical examination taking the center stage
at the expense of other signiﬁcant hazards.
Factories and Works Act: Chapter 14.08. 1948 revised
1996.20 Relevant to OHS, Part 1V of the act

requires the establishment of accident registers and
reporting to the inspector of all accidents that result

497

498

Annals of Global Health, VOL. 81, NO. 4, 2015
J u l y eA u g u s t 2 0 1 5 : 4 9 5 – 5 0 2

Moyo et al.
Occupational Health and Safety in Southern Africa

in an absence of 3 days or more from the workplace.
Part 1V, item 14 (5) of the act requires that medical
practitioners who attend to workers suffering from
lead, phosphorous, arsenic, or mercury poisoning
or anthrax as a result of occupational exposures
report to the inspector.
Republic of South Africa. The governance and leadership for OHS in South Africa is shared mainly by
3 government departments: the departments of
Labor (DOL), Mineral Resources (DMR), and
Health (DOH). The DOL administers the Occupational Health and Safety Act, no. 85 of 1996
(OHSA),21 which exclude mines and the Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases
Act (COIDA), no. 130 of 1993 (COIDA).22 The
DMR administers the Mine Health and Safety Act
(MHSA), no. 29 of 1996, for the mines.23 The
DOH administers the National Health Act, no. 61
of 2003, which mandates that the provincial government provide OHS.24 The Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works Act (ODMWA), no. 78
of 1973, provides for the compensation of certain
diseases contracted in mines and works only.25
The DOH has adopted the principles of universal health coverage, in line with the World Health
Organization (WHO), to increase health coverage
with essential health services for those with the
greatest need. It is envisaged that the introduction
of universal health coverage will increase OHS coverage, especially for workers in small, medium, and
micro enterprises, agriculture, and the informal
economy, as per the World Health Assembly
60.26 and the WHO’s global plan of action on
workers’ health.26
In terms of the OHSA and MHSA, the
employer is responsible for the provision of health
and safety in the workplace, including the costs
for hazard identiﬁcation and control and the provision of a medical surveillance program where applicable.21,23 The compensation legislation COIDA
and ODMWA both provide for medical insurance
for the treatment of occupational diseases and injuries for workers, at least for those in the formal
economy.22,25 The health services for the industry
are procured from the private sector through
employer-funded medical aid schemes (insurance)
and for some enterprises are provided in-house by
industry providers and hospitals. Some workers in
the informal economy; small, medium, and micro
enterprises; agriculture; and contract or casual workers receive their curative OHS services from the provincial DOH in undesignated clinics such as family
medicine, internal medicine, surgical, and

emergency departments, and thus are covered
through general tax revenue.24 Overall private
health insurance (medical aid schemes), which covers high- and middle-income workers and their
families, covered about 16% to 17% of the population, but accounted for more than 45% of total
health care ﬁnancing for South Africa.27,28 Currently, there is paucity of data on the exact contribution of industry to the total health care expenditure
in the private sector, but dated data estimates it to
be 6%.29
Botswana. In Botswana, the main custodian of
OHS is the Ministry of Labor and Home Affairs.30
The main responsibilities of the division include the
following:
d
d
d
d

Assessment of the suitability of designs of factories.
Registration of factories.
Inspection of factories and other places of work.
Registration and inspection of plant and machinery.

This division is also responsible for disseminating information on OHS and participates in the
drawing up of Botswana National Health and Safety
Standards.30
In Botswana, the regulation of OHS is scattered
over a number of acts of Parliament and is under the
custody of many government ministries. Legislation
includes the Factories Act (under the Ministry of
Labor and Social Security); the Food Control Act,
Public Health Act, and Control of Smoking Act
(under the Ministry of Health); Agrochemicals
Act (under the Ministry of Agriculture); the Mines,
Quarries Works, and Machinery Act (Ministry of
Minerals, Energy, and Water Resources); the
Atmospheric Pollution (Prevention) Act and Waste
Management Act (Ministry of Environment, Wildlife, and Tourism); and the Radiation Protection
Act (Ministry of Communication, Science, and
Technology).31
The Ministry of Health, through its public
health division, provides specialized occupational
health services.32 The services include, among other
issues, research in OHS, risk management, development of policies, and standards and provision of
occupational health surveillance programs. It also
provides occupational health diagnostic services
and diagnostic occupational health services for exminers.33
Diagnostic and curative services can be accessed
through the normal health delivery system, although
an occupational health specialist clinic in the Ministry of Health exists in the capital. Two important

Annals of Global Health, VOL. 81, NO. 4, 2015
J u l y eA u g u s t 2 0 1 5 : 4 9 5 – 5 0 2

pieces of legislation in the mining sector include the
Mines, Quarries, Works and Machinery Act
(MQWMA)34 and the Workmen’s Compensation
Act.35 Part X of the former addresses Health and
Labor issues (regulations 91-103) and prohibits
the employment of any person in a mine unless
they have undergone a medical examination by a
registered medical practitioner and have been certiﬁed as ﬁt. The act stipulates the content of the
examination that should include a chest x-ray and
an audiometry test. Conditions such as tuberculosis,
pneumoconiosis, ankylostomiasis, nystagmus, dermatitis, or any infectious diseases constitute an
exclusionary criteria from employment in a mine.
The act also sets down in detail the responsibilities
and requirements for workers and employers necessary to create a safe working environment.
Workmen’s Compensation Act. The act offers a
comprehensive framework for the compensation of
accidents and occupational diseases. Under this
act, reporting of accidents arising out of and in
the course of employment that lead to permanent
disablement or sickness-related absences exceeding
3 days are required to be reported within 17 days of
the date of injury.35 Under this act, it is the
responsibility of the employer to compensate the
injured. Negligence or deliberate contravention of
any law, regulation, or order meant to protect the
health and safety of workers are among some of the
exclusions from eligibility to compensation. The act
also provides for a schedule of occupational diseases
and impairment values for anatomical losses of
speciﬁed body regions.
Zambia. The OHS board is the main national body
that is responsible for the coordination and collaboration of OHS issues in Zambia.36 The main national
competent bodies charged with an OHS regulatory
function in promoting and enforcing OHS include
Occupational Safety and Health Services Department (Ministry of Labor and Social Security), Mines
Safety Department (Ministry of Mines, Energy, and
Water Development), and Radiation Protection
Authority (Ministry of Health). The Occupational
Health and Safety Institute, which is under the
Ministry of Health, is also a national body charged
with a specialized occupational health care function
and provision of laboratory services and serves as a
research institution for OHS.36
The nongovernmental organizations dealing with
OHS issues include the Zambia Occupational Health
and Safety Association, Zambia Organisation for
Occupational Health and Safety, and Zambia
National Association of Hearing Impaired.36

Moyo et al.
Occupational Health and Safety in Southern Africa

The Occupational Health and Safety Institute is
a regulatory body that was established under the
Occupational Health and Safety Act No. 36 of
2010 of the laws of Zambia and came into effect
by Statutory Instrument No. 54 of 2012 signed by
the Minister of Health.37 The institute is charged
with the responsibility of designing OHS services,
conducting occupational medical evaluations, establishing health promotion programs, carrying out
occupational disease diagnostics, and investing and
researching OHS, among other functions. The
institute also provides a special medical evaluation
services for retirees termed Village Beneﬁts Pneumoconiosis Medical Examination. This service function
is provided to retirees for the remainder of their
lives.
Key pieces of OHS legislation in Zambia include
the Factories Act, only applicable to workplaces
deﬁned as factories; the Mining Regulations, only
applicable to the mining industry; the Occupational
Health and Safety Act, applicable to all sectors of
the economy; the Ionizing Radiation Act, which
provides for the protection of the public and workers from dangers arising from the use of devices or
materials capable of producing ionizing radiation;
and the Workers’ Compensation Act, providing
for the establishment and administration of a fund
for the compensation of workers who are disabled
by accidents or who contract diseases in the course
of their employment.36
OCCUPATIONAL MEDICINE

Throughout Africa, human resources capital in
occupational medicine is scarce and where they are
offered at company level, they are usually primary
care in nature.38 Although specialist-level occupational medicine services are available to a limited
extent in the public sector in South Africa, they exist
to an even much lesser extent in sub-Saharan
Africa.38 Occupational medicine is a fairly new discipline in Africa with a very lean human resource
base in southern Africa. In most African countries,
the gap between the number of practicing occupational medicine physicians and occupational health
nurse practitioners is alarmingly wide compared
with the populations indicated earlier on in the
southern African states. It has been asserted that
there is generally an acute shortage of OHS practitioners and services in most developing countries.39
A survey of specialist occupational medical services in Africa in 2004 revealed that Zambia and
Botswana had a specialist public-sector service

499

500

Annals of Global Health, VOL. 81, NO. 4, 2015
J u l y eA u g u s t 2 0 1 5 : 4 9 5 – 5 0 2

Moyo et al.
Occupational Health and Safety in Southern Africa

provided through the Occupational Health and
Safety Management Board and the Ministry of
Health, respectively.38 By then, Botswana had a single specialist occupational health clinic located
within the Ministry of Health. This clinic provided
and continues to provide diagnostic services, disability assessment, occupational hygiene, research, and
pneumoconiosis screening. To date, there has been
the emergence of private occupational medicine specialist clinics40 and occupational medicine
practitionererun occupational health centers in
mines and companies. One study demonstrated
that in 2004, the only available occupational health
services in Zambia were on the Zambian Copperbelt provided by the Occupational Health and
Safety Board.38 In Zimbabwe, occupational medicine services have been provided by the National
Social Security Authority through its occupational
health clinics in Harare, Bulawayo, Gweru, and
Masvingo. Additionally, the private sector complements this function through enterprise-based occupational medicine services that are run by
occupational medicine specialists, occupational
medicine practitioners, and general practitioners.
The major problem in the provision of specialist
occupational medicine services in southern Africa
has been the inadequacy and in some instances a
complete lack of qualiﬁed and accredited specialists
in the ﬁeld. This is evidenced by the very low margins
of occupational medicine specialists, with South
Africa having 31,41 Botswana with 1,40 and
Zimbabwe with 2.42 This statistic points to an urgent
need to provide Africa with occupational medicine
skills. For the basic occupational health services concept to succeed in southern Africa, major work on
equipping nurses and doctors with basic occupational
health skills remains urgent. Short courses and workshops for general medical practitioners would be
invaluable. However, there has been an increase in
the number of medical practitioners and nurses holding a diploma in occupational health who now work
in companies and institutions offering occupational
health. Most of the occupational medical centers in
southern Africa are funded locally by governments
and private companies. For southern Africa to realize
basic occupational health services, let alone specialist
occupational medicine services, quite substantial
human resource capital and expertise is required to
grow a minimum base for the provision of such
services.
Training in OHS. Specialist training in occupational
medicine remains greatly constrained in expanding
economies. Human resources for OHS have proven

to be a major challenge in southern Africa, as is career
development in OHS. Career pathing is a challenge
even for occupational medicine, a stand-alone specialty recognized by both the College of Medicine
South Africa and the Health Professionals Council of
South Africa.41,43 In Zimbabwe, occupational medicine is a recognized and registrable specialty that, due
to limited numbers of trained experts, has no separate
register but is catered for under the Community
Medicine Specialist Register. In Botswana, occupational medicine is a registrable specialty.
Although there are professional bodies such as
the South African Society for Occupational Health
Nurses, South African Society for Occupational
Medicine, South African Institute for Occupational
Hygienists, Ergonomics Society of South Africa,
Health Professionals Council of South Africa, and
the South African Nursing Council, it is nearly
impossible to quantify the number of OHS professionals active in the discipline in South Africa. The
same goes for Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Botswana,
and unfortunately there are no accurate published
statistics for these professional cadres.
In southern Africa, local specialist occupational
medicine training only exists in South Africa in 5
universities. Aspiring candidates in southern Africa
have to study either in South Africa or pursue their
studies overseas. The only available training in Zimbabwe, Zambia, and Botswana in the ﬁeld are the
nonclinical general OHS courses at certiﬁcate,
diploma, degree, and master’s level.
South Africa has 5 medical institutions training
occupational medicine specialists, but more than
10 that train OHS professionals. The quality of
the training programs for some occupational health
professionals may require standardization and quality assurance because the training and development
agencies are also the professional bodies. Medical
doctors can receive occupational health training in
a form of a 2-year part-time diploma course offered
as a combination of distance learning and/or block
release in various universities or a formal 4-year specialty training recognized by the College of Medicine South Africa. Currently, the majority of
workplace health services in South Africa are run
by diplomats as the specialty is still new.
CONCLUSION

The 4
tional
OHS.
OHS

countries reviewed here possess the foundalegislative frameworks and organization of
However, just like the rest of the world,
access for workers remains greatly

Annals of Global Health, VOL. 81, NO. 4, 2015
J u l y eA u g u s t 2 0 1 5 : 4 9 5 – 5 0 2

Moyo et al.
Occupational Health and Safety in Southern Africa

constrained. The mining sector in these countries
possesses relevant pieces of legislation. The major
hold in these 4 countries is the inadequacy of the
human capital, particularly in occupational medicine. Development of clinical occupational health
services infrastructure and support structures

remains a critical component in the implementation
of the basic occupational health services concept.
Introduction of short courses and seminars on occupational health for primary health care services personnel would be invaluable in advancing the cause
of occupational health.

REFERENCES
1. Improving safety and health at work
through the decent work agenda.
International Labour Organization.
Available at: http://www.ilo.org/
safework/projects/WCMS_149466/
langeen/index.htm. Accessed May
13, 2015.
2. Workers’ health: global plan of action.
Sixtieth World Health Assembly.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization. Available at: http://
www.who.int/occupational_health/
WHO_health_assembly_en_web.
pdf?ua¼1; 2007. Accessed March 5,
2015.
3. World Health Organisation; Occupational Health. The Global Occupational Health Network [GOHNET]
Newsletter, 2009 (15): 1-2. Geneva
(Switzerland): WHO press; 2009.
Available at: http://www.who.int/
occupational_health/network/gohnet_
15.pdf?ua¼1. Accessed August 16,
2015.
4. World Bank. Country and lending
groups. Washington DC: The World
Bank Group 2015. Available at:
http://data.worldbank.org/about/count
ry-and-lending-groups#Upper_middle_
income. Accessed April 20, 2015.
5. Statistics South Africa. Statistical
Release P0302: Mid year Population
Estimates 2014. Pretoria, South
Africa: Stats SA; 2014.
6. World Bank. DATA. South Africa.
Washington, DC: The World Bank
Group. Available at: http://data.world
bank.org/country/south-africa; 2015.
Accessed April 9, 2015.
7. Statistics South Africa. Statistical
release P0211: quarterly Labour Force
Survey, Quarter 4, 2014. Pretoria,
South Africa: Stats SA.
8. The World Bank. Zimbabwe. SubSaharan Africa. http://data.worldbank.
org/country/Zimbabwe; Accessed May
14, 2015.
9. Zimbabwe Population Census 2012.
http://www.zimstat.co.zw/sites/default/
ﬁles/img/publications/Census/Census
Results2012/National_Report.pdf. Accessed August 17, 2015.
10. Statistics for Zimbabwe. Geneva:
World Health Organization. Available

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

at: http://www.who.int/countries/zwe/
en/. Accessed May 14, 2015.
The National Social Security Authority
of Zimbabwe, Annual Statistical Report,
2013. https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/
statcomps/ssi_asr/2013/ssi_asr13.pdf.
The World Bank Data. Botswana.
Available at: http://data.worldbank.
org/country/botswana. Accessed May
19, 2015.
Statistics Botswana Annual Report
2013/2014. http://www.cso.gov.bw/
index.php/news-events/145-statisticsbotswana-annual-report-2013-14.
Accessed 17 August 2015
The World Bank Data. Zambia.
Available at: www.data.worldbank.
org/country/zambia. Accessed May
14, 2015.
Guidelines on quality management in
multidisciplinary occupational health
services. Geneva: World Health
Organization,
WHO
European
Centre for Environment and Health.
Available at: http://www.who.int/occu
pational_health/regions/en/oeheurqua
litymanagement.pdf; 1999. Accessed
May 14, 2015.
Ratiﬁcations of ILO Conventions.
International Labour Organization.
Available at: www.ilo.org/dyn/norml
ex/en. Accessed May 19, 2015.
National Social Security Authority of
Zimbabwe. Available at: www.nssa.
org.zw. Accessed May 5, 2015.
Statutory Instrument 68 of 1990. Act
12/89. National Social Security
Authority (Accident Prevention and
Workers Compensation Scheme)
Notice, 1990. Zimbabwe.
Pneumoconiosis Act. Chapter 15.08.
of 1971 revised 1996. (19) Government Printer, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Factories and Works Act. Chapter 14.
08. 1948 revised 1996. Government
Printers, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Occupational Health and Safety Act
of 1996, Act no. 85. Pretoria (South
Africa).
Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act of 1993, Act no.
130. Pretoria (South Africa).
Mine Health and Safety Act of 1996,
Act no. 29. Pretoria (South Africa).

24. National Health Act of 2003, Act no.
61. Pretoria (South Africa).
25. Occupational Diseases in Mines and
Works Act of 1973, Act no. 78. Pretoria (South Africa).
26. World Health Organisation. Occupational Health. Workers’ Health:
Global Plan of Action. Geneva (Switzerland): WHO press. Available at:
http://www.who.int/occupational_
health/publications/global_plan/en/.
Accessed August 16, 2015.
27. Atagura J, Akazili J. Health care ﬁnancing in South Africa: moving towards universal coverage. CME 2010;28:74e8.
28. Council for Medical Schemes. Publications: Annual reports 2012-2013.
Pretoria (South Africa): Council for
Medical Schemes. Available at:
https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/
101411211/AR2012_2013.pdf. Accessed
August 16, 2015.
29. McIntyre D, Bloom G, Doherty J,
Brijlal P. Health Expenditure and
Finance in South Africa. Durban: Health
Systems Trust and World Bank; 1995.
30. Occupational health and safety. Ministry of Labour & Home Affairs.
Available at: http://www.gov.bw/en/
MinistrieseAuthorities/Ministries/
Ministry-of-LaboureHome-AffairsMLHA/DepartmenteUnits/Occupa
tional-Health-and-Safety/. Accessed
June 29, 2015.
31. Occupational Health and Safety. http://
www.gov.bw/Global/Occupational%
20Health%20and%20Safety%5B1%5D.
pdf. Accessed August 17, 2015.
32. Ministry of Health. Ex- Miners
Diagnostic Services. http://www.gov.
bw/en/MinistrieseAuthorities/Ministries/
MinistryofHealth-MOH/ToolseServices/
Serviceseforms/?FromPageID¼3038
&FromPageType¼1&pid¼1&Clear
Search¼true. Accessed August 17,
2015.
33. Ex-miner’s diagnostic services programme. Ministry of Health. Available at: http://www.gov.bw/en/Mini
strieseAuthorities/Ministries/Ministry
ofHealth-MOH/ToolseServices/Servi
ceseforms/The-use-of-a-kgotla-forconsultation-and-decisione1/. Access
ed June 28, 2015.

501

502

Annals of Global Health, VOL. 81, NO. 4, 2015
J u l y eA u g u s t 2 0 1 5 : 4 9 5 – 5 0 2

Moyo et al.
Occupational Health and Safety in Southern Africa

34. Mines, Quarries, Works and Machinery Act. Chapter 44:02. Botswana.
35. Worker’s Compensation, Chapter 47:
03. Government of Botswana. Available at: http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/
groups/public/e-ed_protect/e-prot
rav/e-ilo_aids/documents/legaldocum
ent/wcms_125673.pdf. Accessed June
26, 2015.
36. Zambia country proﬁle on occupational
safety and health 2012. ILO Country
Ofﬁce for Zambia, Malawi and Mozambique in Lusaka, 2012. Available
at: http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/
public/e-ed_protect/e-protrav/e-safe
work/documents/policy/wcms_208195.
pdf. Accessed June 26, 2015.

37. Occupational Health and Safety Institute. Available at: http://ohsi.co.zm/?
page_id¼17. Accessed June 29, 2015.
38. Naidoo RN, Ryan A. “Specialist
Occupational Medicine Services in
Sub Saharan Africa” African Newsletter on Occupational Health and Safety
2004;14:4e6.
39. Clarke E. Multi-disciplinary occupational health services. African Newsletter on Occupational Health and
Safety 2004;14:4.
40. MOSO Clinics. Available at: http://
www.mosoclinics.co.bw/index.php/
our-team. Accessed June 30, 2015.
41. Health Professions Council of South
Africa. Available at: http://isystems.

hpcsa.co.za/iregister/. Accessed July
1, 2015.
42. Public searchable register. Medical
and Dental Practitioners, Council of
Zimbabwe. Available at: http://www.
mdpcz.co.zw/index.php/searchablemembers-directory/entries?f[Specialty]
¼SpecialistþCommunityþPhysician.
Accessed January 7, 2015.
43. Examinations/Diplomas
for
the
College of Public Health Medicine.
The Colleges of Medicine of South
Africa. Available at: http://www.
collegemedsa.ac.za/view_college.aspx?
collegeid¼21. Accessed June 30,
2015.

